Rules & Regulations 

 
For 

 
M.S. by Research Programs 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 



 
There has been an increasing need to embed innovation components in various academic programs. 
Traditionally, research-based academic programs emphasize on scholarly publications. However, it is 
also important to recognize other forms of contributions, i.e. patents, technology development, 
entrepreneurship, etc., as outcomes of research initiatives. In view of this, the Institute has started MS 
by Research programs in cross-disciplinary, multi-disciplinary as well as application-directed areas. The 
research problems increasingly require a multidisciplinary approach to solve complex problems of 
interest or propose solutions leading to new innovations and entrepreneurship ventures. Today, we 
need in many cases diverse disciplines to engage in a spectrum of research-based activities ranging from 
scientific to social issues that challenge contemporary society- establishing a consistency between 
diverse academic spaces. A considerable demand exists for such professionals who can synthesize more 
than one discipline and create teams of academicians and scholars that enrich the overall educational 
and research experience. 
 
M.S. by Research Programs are expected to be designed for: 
 
i) Innovative Research Outcomes in cross-disciplinary / multi-disciplinary areas. Such Programs are 
expected to be offered by schools or centres synergising diverse academic disciplines; admission will 
be through the academic unit specified admission process. 
 
ii) Innovation Driven Outcomes leading to EIR’s and / or Start-Up’s; admission will be through the 
academic unit specified admission process. 
 
iii) Targeted Deliveries linked to projects sponsored by external agencies. Only project fellows 
appointed in a delivery-oriented project can register in part-time mode through a DRC/SRC/CRC 
monitored selection process. 
 
iv) The regular M.S. by Research students can be in the Centres and CoE only. The Department can admit 
M.S. by Research students supported by the R&D project. Only one (01) M.S. by Research student can be 
allocated to a faculty. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 



1. Limits on Registration  
A M.S. by Research student can register for maximum and minimum number of credits in a semester as 
indicated in Table 1.1.  
Table 1.1 Maximum and Minimum Credits a M.S. by Research student can register for during the Regular 
semester  

M.S. by Research student registered under Indicative Maximum Minimum Credits 
different categories  Credits  
Full-time Regular 16 6 
Part-Time 12 3 

  
1.1. Registration Kept Alive (RKA) 
A student admitted to an M.S. by Research program who has at least completed minimum credit 
requirement of the first semester, can keep his studentship alive while he is pursuing any professional 
activity, by opting for RKA in subsequent semesters. The candidate must indicate his intent of RKA before 
the last date of late registration through DRC to Dean(academic). The candidate has to pay appropriate 
registration fees for RKA status (similar to M.Tech. students). A student can maintain RKA status for a 
maximum of 6 semesters.  
 
1.2 Change of Registration from M.S. by Research Programme to Ph.D. Programme  
The M.S. by Research Degree can be upgraded to Ph.D. based on the CGPA (>7.5) and progress of the student 
after 3 Semesters for regular students; however, transition will require continuation of the same work and 
the student has to satisfy regular PhD requirements. All conditions of Ph.D. degree program will be 
applicable to all such students. All such changes of registration shall be reported to the Senate. 
 
1.3 Maximum Duration of a Program 
A full-time M.S. by Research student can complete the program between 2 years (minimum) to 4 years 
(maximum). A part-time student can complete the program between 3 years (minimum) to 5 years 
(maximum) 
 
2 ACADEMIC REQUIREMENTS 
2.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for PG Programs 
The total credits for a course is calculated by taking into account the number of lectures, tutorial, and 
practical hours (L-T-P) assigned as given in Table 2.1. Each credit is associated with the number of contact 
hours and the expected number of self-learning hours (on an average) to be spent by the student for each 
contact hour to meet academic demand of the course. 
Table 2.1 LTP-structure and credit assignment for M.S. by research 

Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact Hours# Total 
Credits 

Contact Hours Beyond Contact Total (TC=TH/4) 
(CH) 

Hours (BCH) Hours 

(TH) 

1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 3 4 1 

1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 3 4 1 

1 hour of Lab 0-0-1 1 1 2 0.5 

1 hour of Thesis/Project 0-0-1 1 3 4 1 

#Contact hour for a project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc. 
 
2.2. Academic Credit Requirements for M.S. by Research Students 
A student enrolled in the M.S. Program will require to complete 24 credits through course work, including 
the 4 NG credits, and 36 credits through research; The coursework credits may include elective courses- 
suggested by the School/Centers/SRC- and a presentation towards the assigned/defined research problem; 
 
 
 

3 
 



 
2.3 Academic Performance Requirements 
2.3.1 Minimum performance for continuation and Graduation in a program 
The minimum CGPA requirement for continuation and graduation in a program is given below in Table 2.2. 
 
Table 2.2 Minimum CGPA requirements  

Sr. Program Continuation in Programme For graduation 
No. (SGPA) 

1 M.S. by Research 6.5 (For first semester >=6) 7.5 at completion of course 
work 

 
2.4 Degree Grade Point Average (DGPA) for M.S. by Research students  

A M.S. by Research student who has completed the credit requirements for the course work but has a CGPA 
less than 7.5 (required for graduation) will be evaluated using Degree Grade Point Average (DGPA) where 
DGPA is defined with respect to the best performance of the student in minimum number of credits. 

2.5 Minimum performance for continuation of Assistantship/Fellowship 
The minimum CGPA requirement for continuation Assistantship/Fellowship is given in Table 2.3 
Table 2.3 Minimum CGPA requirements for Continuation of Assistantship/Fellowship 

Sr. No. Program Continuation of Assistantship/ 
Fellowship 

1 M.S. by Research 6.5 

 
3. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE 
 Financial assistantship/scholarship will be provided to the eligible students admitted under regular 
full-time program.  The regular M.S. by Research students would get fellowship/assistantship up to a 
maximum of 2 years as JRF starting from the date of registration. In exceptional cases, the fellowship can be 
extended to a maximum of one more year depending on the work done and the recommendations of the 
supervisor and SRC.  
 
4. LEAVE RULES 
Leave rules for M.S. by Research will be followed as per the approved Rules and regulation for Ph.D. students 
enrolled from July 2022 onwards.  
 
5. RULES AND REGULATION FOR CONDUCT AND EVALUATION OF M.S. project/thesis 
 

a) Allotment of students to supervisors will be made on the preferences of the students and 
supervisor(s). 

b) The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the first semester.  
c) Head or CRC would advise the student until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor(s) 
d) The SRC will normally consist of supervisor(s) and three other faculty members conversant with the 

field of research with at least one-member external to the center (may be outside the Institute also).  
e) A Student Research Committee (SRC) for the candidate shall be proposed by the supervisor(s), 

recommended by the CRC and approved by Dean (Academics).  
f) The SRC shall have one member identified as Chairman for administrative functions and the 

supervisor(s) will act as convener. Chairman, SRC is to be appointed by Dean (Academics). 
g) The appointment of SRC should be completed by the end of the first semester. 
h) Any   subsequent   changes   in   the composition of SRC shall be communicated through the CRC to 

Dean (Academics) for record.  
i) The SRC and supervisor(s) shall be the   internal examiners for the evaluation of the thesis. 
j) The   SRC   is   expected   to   monitor   the   progress   of   the   candidate   until   the completion of 

the program. 
k) More than one student may be allowed to work on a problem of multi-disciplinary nature with a 

clear justification and problem statement describing the roles and responsibilities of the students 
l) The quality of the work can be assessed in terms of publications / patents / innovations / technology 

transfers / start-ups at the end of the project; 

4 
 



m) The Project / Thesis will be required to be evaluated by one examiner outside the Institute from the 
list of examiners proposed by the SRC and the SRC.  

 

6. GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS 

A student is deemed to have completed the requirements for graduation, if she/he has met the requirements 
laid down in Clauses 6.1 to 6.4 below. 
 
6.1 Minimum Residential Requirement  

Table 6.1 Minimum residential requirement  

S.No. Program  Qualifications at the time of joining the Minimum Duration (in 
Program semesters) of Residence  

1. M.S. by Research 

  Full-time Regular All qualifying degrees 4 
/Sponsored 

  Part-time/ Part-time All qualifying degrees 0 
Executive 

 

6.2 Academic  

The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she/he has earned the minimum 
credits as per Section 2.2, while meeting the minimum CGPA requirements as mentioned in Section 2.3. 

 6.3 No Dues Clearance 

Degree will be awarded after obtaining No Dues Clearance from all concerned sections as deemed necessary 
by Dean (Academics). 

 17.4 No case of Disciplinary Action  

The student shall not be considered to have completed the Academic Requirements if there is any case of 
indiscipline pending against her/him.  

  

6.5 Award of Degrees  

6.5.1 Provisional Certificate 

A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 6.1 to 6.4, can be provided a 
provisional certificate by the office of Dean (Academics) on the approval of Chairman, Senate. 

 6.5.2 Degree Certificate 

A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 6.1 to 6.4, is recommended 
by the Senate to the Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate degree in the ensuing 
convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the BOG accords its approval.  

 6.6 Withdrawal of Degree  

5 
 



Under extremely exceptional circumstances, where gross violation of the graduation requirements is 
detected at a later stage, the Senate may recommend to the Board of Governors for withdrawal of a degree 
already awarded to the student. 

 7. AMENDMENTS 

Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the right to 
modify/amend, without notice, Rules and Regulations of the Postgraduate programmes at IIT-Jodhpur. 
 

6 
 


















 
 

Annexure-I 

 

 

 

Regulations for  

IIT Jodhpur-AIIMS Jodhpur Joint Programs (Masters-PhD Dual 

Degree and PhD) in Medical Technologies 

 

 

 

 

 

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

 

 

All India Institute of Medical Sciences Jodhpur 

 

 

  

1 
 



 
 

Appointment of Supervisor: 

 

• Any faculty member at AIIMS/IIT Jodhpur holding fulltime position can be 

designated as Supervisor.  

• Faculty members of IIT and AIIMS can supervise Ph.D. students as per the 

regulations of respective institute.  

• The faculty member who himself/herself is registered for Ph.D. programme will not 

be eligible for the supervision of Ph.D.  

• There will be at-least one supervisor each from both AIIMS Jodhpur and IIT 

Jodhpur. A maximum of three supervisors are allowed. 

• External supervisor with at least two years of post-graduate teaching experience/2 

years post PhD research experience as medical/non-medical 

researcher/scientist/faculty member may be appointed as supervisor provided 

he/she has original/significant research contribution in the field. 

 

1. Qualifier Requirement and plan for thesis work 

For the dual degree: 

Step 1: After 1st semester- 

The candidate has to identify the need from immersion+ problem definition 

emphasizing scope for innovation and development  

Step 2: After 4th Semester and by 5th Semester- 

SOTA seminar + detailed presentation on scientific challenges and innovation model 

of the identified problem 

Step 3: After 6th Semester and by 7th Semester 

Present translation agenda and/or business plan 

Step 4: After 7th Semester 

To take a call while presenting, whether to opt for degree with translational 

component/ product development 

OR 

Opt for incubation with a business plan 

 

For Ph.D. degree: 

• Step 1: After 1st Semester 

• The candidate has to identify the need from immersion+ problem definition 

emphasizing scope for innovation and development  

• Step 2: By end of 2nd Semester 

• Present foundation of the identified problem of product development  

• Step 3: By end of 3rd Semester 

• Present SOTA seminar 

2 
 



 

 

 

• Step 4: By end of 4th Semester 

• Present complete plan for translation/prototyping the device  

• Step 5: By end of 7th Semester 

• To take a call while presenting, whether to opt for degree with translational 

component /product development 

      OR 

• Opt for incubation with a business plan 
 

Assessment of the work of the candidates 

• Annual progress work during the thesis work shall be assessed by the Doctoral 

committee and a report will be submitted to the Dean through the supervisor. 

• The doctoral committee will be formed after 1st Semester and before end of second 

semester 
 

Thesis and examination 

• The thesis will be submitted after an open seminar presented by the candidate and 

the approval of the Doctoral committee.  

• At least two patents (or equivalent IP right document) filed is essential for 

submitting the thesis. 

• Each candidate shall submit four print copies and pdf format of the thesis duly 

certified by the Supervisor and the Co-Supervisor(s) for evaluation after completion 

of the required period.  

• A panel of examiners shall be submitted before the expected date of submission of 

the thesis, by the supervisor, in consultation with the Doctoral committee. The 

panel shall include eight examiners who are experts in the field of the study 

undertaken by the candidate (three of these shall be from abroad).  

• The supervisors may go for the consent of the examiners before proposing the 

names in the examiner list. 

• In the thesis evaluation form, the points of judgment of the thesis can be the 

novelty/contribution of the product development/translation 

• After approval of thesis by the external and the internal examiners the viva voce 

examination will be held to adjudge the proficiency of the candidate in the 

subject(s) allied to the candidate’s field of work. 

• If the thesis is rejected by more than one examiner, it will stand rejected and shall 

not be referred to any other examiner. However, in the event the thesis is rejected 

by only one examiner, it will be referred to another examiner from among the 

approved panel. In case the thesis is approved by this examiner, it will be 

considered as unanimously approved, else the respective Chairman, Senate may 

advise course of action. 

3 
 



 

 

 

 

• If one or more examiner recommends re-submission/modification of thesis, the 

same shall be done within a maximum period of six months from the date of 

intimation to the candidate. 

• If the report from all the external examiners is not received within three months, 

a copy of thesis will be sent to another examiner from amongst the approved panel. 

• The thesis  

• defense will be conducted in the presence of Doctoral committee and one of the 

external examiners who has examined the thesis. 

 

Credit Requirements for the Ph.D. degree 

• Candidates enrolled in PhD, other than through Master’s programme : Compulsory 

courses of Master’s Programme + 6 Elective Credits (Thesis 48) 

• Candidates through Master’s programme —6 Elective Credits (Thesis 48) 

 

Result 

(a) If the Examiners are not satisfied with the performance of the candidate in the 

above examination, the candidate will have to reappear for another viva vice 

examination after a period of two months provided such specific 

recommendation is made by the board of Examiners. 

(b) The candidate shall be declared eligible for the award of the Degree of Doctor 

of Philosophy only on the unanimous recommendations of the members of the 

Board of Examiners at the viva voce examination. 

 

Award of Degree: 

The transcript will be issued by the institute in which the candidate will be registered. The 

degree will be awarded jointly by AIIMS Jodhpur and IIT Jodhpur in alternate 

Convocations.  

The degree certificate will be issued and signed by competent authorities from both the 

Institutes.  

4 
 



 

 

 

ACADEMIC PROGRAMMES 

 

 

 

 

Rules & Regulations 

(​For Students enrolled from July 2019 onwards​) 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

 

  

 

 

1 



1.​ ​INTRODUCTION 

Academic programmes at Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur are designed to develop the 

highest calibre human resource capable of understanding the new patterns of knowledge 

creation across disciplines obliterating traditional boundaries between science, humanities, 

social sciences and engineering. IIT Jodhpur aims to produce quality professionals who would be 

able to address profound and wide-ranging societal challenges of the 21st century such as 

energy, food, water, housing, mobility, and health. In addition to imparting scientific 

knowledge, IIT Jodhpur endeavours to inculcate human qualities of courage, integrity, fairness, 

humility and team effort among its graduates through curricular, co-curricular and 

extra-curricular activities on campus. 

The undergraduate academic programmes focus on developing a temper for the life long 

process of learning, creative thinking and exploring. The postgraduate academic programmes 

focus on developing a deep understanding of the subject of study coupled with creative 

inquisitiveness and the ability to address and solve new problems with a free and objective 

mind.  

 

The academic programmes are based on three tenets of (1) semester system, (2) Credit 

System and (3) Relative Grading. These academic programmes are administered by a duly 

constituted Academic Committee (AC) through the office of Academics. The AC will be chaired 

by Dean (Academics). In the absence of Dean (Academics), Associate Dean (Academics- 

PG)/Associate Dean (Academics- UG) will discharge the responsibilities of Dean (Academics). 

 

The Senate of the Institute has formulated a set of guidelines and rules to ensure a high 

standard of performance as well as for smooth functioning of the academic programmes. Within 

this broad set of guidelines, subject to the approval of Senate, different programmes can 

include additional academic requirements as deemed necessary for that programme. These 

academic programmes are continuously monitored by the Senate and make appropriate 

modifications/ improvements as and when necessary. 

 

 

2. ACADEMIC SESSION 

The academic session normally runs from the end of July in one year to the middle of July in the 

next year. The academic session is divided into three parts: two regular semesters and a 

summer term as per the following timelines:  

 

Semester I: From the fourth week of July to the last week of November  

Semester II: From the last week of December to the last week of April  

Summer Term: From the middle of May to the middle of July.  

 

Excluding the days of the examinations, the total number of days of instruction in a semester is 

at least 70.  

 

2.1 Academic Calendar 

The academic calendar gives the exact dates of all important events during the Academic 

Session, such as orientation, registration, the commencement of classes, adding and dropping 

of courses, submission of documents, examinations, submission of grades, project evaluation, 

declaration of results, mid-semester recess, and vacation. This calendar is approved by the 

Senate. 

 

 

 

 

2 



3. REGISTRATION 

a. Registration: ​Students are required to register for prescribed credits as per the programme, 

on the dates specified in the Academic Calendar. If the student does not register by the date of 

registration, she/he can register by paying the fine and register before the date of late 

registration.  

 

b. Provisional Registration: ​A fresh student joining the Institute, who is awaiting the final 

results of the qualifying examination, is allowed to register provisionally on submission of a 

certificate from her/his last Institute stating that she/he has appeared in the final examination 

of the qualifying degree. The student is required to submit documents of having passed the 

qualifying examination by the last date given in the Academic Calendar for the registration to be 

regularized. 

 

c. Late Registration: ​If the student does not register by the date of late registration as 

mentioned in the Academic Calendar, he/she will be deregistered. The appeal against 

deregistration may be made to Chairman, Senate through Dean Academics. Chairman Senate 

may permit the continuation of registration on payment of an appropriate fine.  

 

d. Adding and Dropping of Courses: A student may add or drop course(s) with approval of 

the Faculty advisor till the last date of registration. 

 

e. Withdrawing from a Course: After the last date of add-drop, a student will have the 

option of withdrawing from a course. The last date of course withdrawal will be typically within 

four weeks from the beginning of the Semester as specified in the academic calendar. The 

withdrawn course will be mentioned in the Student’s grade card with a letter grade ‘W’. 

 

f. Cancellation of Semester Registration: Absence for a period of four or more weeks 

during a semester shall result in automatic cancellation of the registration of a student from all 

the courses in that semester. 

 

g. Summer course registration: ​A department may offer summer courses to enable the 

students to clear their backlog courses and/or regular credit courses. A course will run during 

summer provided a faculty member(s) is available for running the course. The course is offered 

on approval of the Dean. 

 

 

4. TEACHING AND EVALUATION 

4.1  Teaching 

4.1.1  ​Medium of Instruction  

The medium of instruction is English. 

 

4.1.2  Course Structure 

All courses have associated credits. Credits of a course are based on the number of contact 

hours for lectures, tutorials, and practicals A student on successful completion of the course 

with a passing grade will earn an equivalent number of credits. Based on the required academic 

maturity level of students for attending a course, a course is assigned a level. A course can 

consist of independent components which can be completed independently. These components 

are called fractals. A course is identified by a unique number. Following tables define all 

parameters related to course numbering scheme. 

 

 

 

3 



Table 4.1​ Course Code Description 

Course Code M E L 1 X X 1 

Descriptions Offering Course Level of Unique Indicates Fractal 

Department/IDRP  Type Courses Identification  

Number 

Categories See Table 4.2 See See Table This code will be 0:  Regular 

Table 4.4 given centrally 1: Fractal 1 

4.3 by the office of 2: Fractal 2 

academics 3: Fractal 3 

 

Note: ​Examples of course codes  

 Course Title L-T-P Course 

Code 

Regular Course Engineering Mechanics 2-1-0 MEL1XX0 

Robotics 3-0-2 MEL7XX0 

Fractal 1: Robot Modelling 1-0-0 MEL7XX1 
Fractal Course 

Fractal 2: Motion Planning and Programming 1-0-0 MEL7XX2 

Fractal 3: Robot Control 1-0-0 MEL7XX3 

 

Table 4.2​ Departmental Code 

S. N. Type Department/Platform/Office 

Department 

1 ME Mechanical Engineering 

2 CS Computer Science and Engineering 

3 EE Electrical Engineering  

4 CI Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 

5 CH Chemical Engineering  

6 BB Bioscience and Bioengineering 

7 MT Metallurgical & Materials Engineering 

8 CY Chemistry 

9 MA Mathematics 

10 PH Physics 

11 HS Humanities and Social Science 

Interdisciplinary Research Platforms (IDRPs) 

12 DH Digital Humanities  

13 SS Space Science and Technology 

14 IO Internet of Things and Applications 

15 AV Autonomous unmanned vehicles (AUV)    

16 QC Quantum Information and Computation 

17 CG Cognitive Science 

18 SH Smart Healthcare 

Others 

19 OA Office of Academics  

20 OS Office of Students 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4 



Table 4.3​ Types for Courses 

S. Course Category 

N. Type 

1 L Lecture courses (other than lecture hours, these courses can have Tutorial and 

Practical hours, e.g. L-T-P Structures 3-0-0, 3-1-2, 3-0-2, 2-0-0, etc.) 

2 P Practical / Practice-based courses (where performance is evaluated primarily 

on the basis of practice, practical or laboratory work with LTP structures such 

as 0-0-3, 0-0-4, 1-0-3, 0-1-3, etc.) 

3 D Project-based courses (e.g. Major, Minor, Mini Projects) 

4 N Non-graded core component  

5 T Thesis 

6 Q Seminar Courses 

7 S Independent Study 

8 R Engineering innovation 

9 E Engineering Design (Graded and Non-Graded) 

 

Table 4.4​ Level of Courses, category and credit requirements 

S. N. Level Category Credit Requirements 

1 100 Courses for B.Tech. Programmes B.Tech. (Cr>=0) 

2 200 

3 300 B.Tech. (Cr>=38) 

4 400 B.Tech. (Cr>=75) 

5 500 Preparatory​ Courses of M.Sc. and M.Tech. M.Tech. (Cr=0) 

Programmes (NOT open to B.Tech. and B.Tech. + M. Sc. (Cr=0) 

M.Tech. Dual Degree) 

6 600 Courses for M.Sc. programmes B.Tech. (Cr>=75) 

M.Sc. (Cr>=0) 

M.Tech. (Cr >= 0) 

7 700 Courses for M.Tech. programmes B.Tech. (Cr>=100) 

 Advanced courses for M.Sc. M.Sc. (Cr >=30) 

M.Tech. (Cr>=0) 

Ph.D. (Cr>=0) 

8 800 Advanced courses for M.Tech. and Ph.D. M.Tech. (Cr>=14)  

programmes, An 800 level course should have 700 Ph.D. (Cr>=0) 

level course as a pre-requisite 

 

4.1.3  Approval of Courses 

The Senate approves each course along with its weight in terms of credits. Only the approved 

courses may be offered during any semester/summer term. 

 

4.1.4  List of Courses 

The list of courses to be offered in a Program is finalized before the beginning of the semester, 

by the Department hosting that Program. 

 

4.1.5  Categories of Courses 

Courses offered can be from one of the following categories:  

 

a) Regular course: 

A regular course has 14 hours of classroom engagement per one credit. A regular course can be 

under elective or core/compulsory categories.  

 

 

5 



 

Elective courses of 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, or 600, level will run if a minimum of 10 students 

registers for the course. A 700 or 800 level elective course can run with a minimum of 5 

registered students. A course not running as a regular course may be offered as a self-study 

course as per the following section.  

 

b) Self-study Course 

A self-study course will be from the list of courses approved by Senate. The main features of a 

self-study course are as follows: 

● A student may be allowed to register for an elective course as a self-study course 

provided that the course is not running in that semester as a regular course or a student 

is not on campus during the course with prior approval of the competent authority.  

● A student may also be permitted to register for a core or program compulsory course in 

self-study mode provided he/she has failed in it earlier and the course is not being 

offered as a regular course during that semester or a student is not on campus during 

the course with prior approval of the competent authority. 

● Students should apply for a self-study course with the appropriate recommendation of a 

Course Coordinator and DUGC/DRC/IRC. The final sanction of a self-study course to a 

student is made by the Dean (Academics). 

● Formal classroom engagement may not be there for a self-study course but laboratory, 

design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the 

course. 

● The Course Coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the 

award of letter grade at the end of the semester. 

● A self-study course will appear with the approved course title on the transcript. 

● Not exceeding 10% of the total graded credit can be opted as a self-study course.  

 

c) Independent Study Course 

Independent study enables a student to pursue course credit on an academic topic of interest 

under the supervision of a faculty member. The term independent does not mean not involving 

an Instructor but independent of regular class engagement. Self-disciplined and having a sense 

of own direction and goals are fundamental requirements of an Independent Study course. A 

student having CGPA more than or equal to 6.0 can opt for Independent Study courses with the 

recommendation of Supervising Professor. The main features of an independent-study course 

are as follows: 

● A student may be permitted to register for a topic of interest as an independent-study 

course not exceeding 3 credits in self-study mode at most once during the program. 

Such independent study course will be counted toward open elective requirements of the 

program and will appear with the title “Independent Study” on the transcript. 

● Students should apply for an independent study course with the appropriate 

recommendation of a Course Coordinator and DUGC/DRC/IRC. The final sanction of an 

independent-study course to a student is made by the Dean (Academics). 

● Normally, no formal lectures will be held for an Independent Study course but 

laboratory, design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral 

part of the course. 

● The course will be arranged, planned and managed by a supervising professor. The 

Course Coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the award 

of letter grade at the end of the semester. 

 

4.1.6  Conduct of Courses 

Each course is conducted by the Instructor with the assistance of the required number of tutors, 

as needed. The Instructor is responsible for conducting the course, evaluating the performance 

 

 

6 



of students, awarding the grades at the end of the semester, and transmitting the grades as per 

Subsection 5.2. 

 

The student shall have access to his/her answer paper(s) of all the written examinations 

conducted for a given course, which may be shown to him/her by the Instructor(s) concerned. 

The instructor must keep all evaluation records in his custody at least for the next six months. 

 

A course approved by the senate of IIT Jodhpur can be conducted through either (i) direct 

contact (ii) synchronized remote contact (iii) guided study mode or combination of these. In 

direct contact mode, coordinator or instructor will have a face to face physical interaction with 

the students. Synchronized remote contact mode would require the faculty and/or the students 

to be concurrently connected to the classroom interaction via electronic conferencing involving 

both audio and video communication. However, there has to be direct interaction between 

faculty and students for limited hours (typically 25%) of the stipulated contact hours. In guided 

study mode, a faculty would guide a single or a group of students to take up the study of an 

approved course via self-learning and discussion-oriented contact sessions. This mode can be 

also adopted for enabling a student to take up study of a new course, not yet approved by the 

Senate, under the supervision of a faculty. All formal evaluation component applicable to 

courses being run through any one of the above-mentioned modes will be conducted under 

direct physical supervision of a faculty. All laboratory component of a course requiring the use 

of the specialized facility will be conducted through direct contact. 

 

4.1.7  Teaching Assignments 

The instructors and tutors for all courses to be offered during the semester are allocated by the 

Head of the Department hosting the Program. When faculty members of other Departments are 

also required to participate in teaching a particular course, the allocation shall be done in 

consultation with the Head of that Department. 

 

4.1.8  Auditing of Courses 

A student may audit a course in addition to the prescribed academic load requirement with the 

permission of Dean (Academics) on the recommendations of Instructor of the course being 

audited and the Faculty Advisor. Under this arrangement, the course will be listed in the Grade 

Card of the student.  

 

4.1.9  Attendance Requirements 

A student should have full attendance in each course. Unless the student takes leave of absence 

for valid reasons, the student has to attend every lecture, tutorial, or lab session. The 

attendance records must be made available to the student after every lecture. Even if the 

student’s attendance falls below 75%, the student will be allowed to appear for the exams. 

Students not meeting the attendance criterion of 75% will be required to score at least C grade 

to pass a course. These students would be awarded F grade if their marks are lower than the 

cut-off for C grade in a course. 

 

4.2​ ​Evaluation 

The performance of students in a course is evaluated continuously, using their interaction in the 

classroom, and performances in examinations, the laboratory work (if any), and term-papers 

and projects. 

 

The performance of students in a course is evaluated through examinations and on a continuous 

basis. The Senate will decide from time to time on the system of tests and examinations in each 

subject in each semester. 

 

 

7 



● Minor 1, Minor 2 and Major examinations are mandatory components of the evaluation of 

a regular 14-week long lecture course. The minor examinations shall be of 60 minutes 

duration and the major examination of 120 minutes. Fractal courses (less than 3 credits) 

must have at least one examination. 
● The total weightage of examination component (three examinations for a 14 week-long 

course) shall be between 40% to 60% of the total weightage of evaluation measure.  
● Evaluation policy has to be known from the first day of the class.  
● The continuous evaluation may include but not limited to interaction in the classroom, 

quizzes, assignments, tutorials, laboratory work, term papers and projects.  
 

 

5.​ ​GRADING SYSTEM 

5.1 Letter Grades 

At the end of the semester, a student is awarded a relative letter grade in each course by the 

Instructor offering the course considering the performance of the student during the semester 

with respect to those of the other students registered in the course. It is proposed that ten 

regular letter grades, namely A*, A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D, E and F shall be awarded in each 

course. Each letter grade is associated with a numerical equivalent on a 10-point scale shown in 

Table 5.1. In addition, there are four special letter grades, namely, I, S, X and U, which stand 

for Incomplete, Satisfactory, Thesis Continuation and Unsatisfactory, respectively. The faculty 

member shall upload grade on the portal as per the stipulated time schedule.  

 

Table 5.1​ Letter grade and its equivalent grade points 

S.N. Letter Grade Grade Points Comment 

1 A* 10 Exceptional 

2 A 10 Outstanding 

3 A- 9 Excellent 

4 B 8 Very Good 

5 B- 7 Good 

6 C 6 Average 

7 C- 5 Below Average 

8 D 4 Marginal 

9 E 2 Poor 

10 F 0 Fail 

11 I Incomplete 

12 S Satisfactory in Course 

13 X Thesis Continuation 

14 U Unsatisfactory 

15 W Withdrawn 

 

 

 

A detailed description of some of the grades is given below: 

S.N. Grades Description 

‘A*’ grade has the same grade point as ‘A’ grade. The grade ‘A*’ indicates 

exceptional performance and is awarded only in the Course/(s) in which the 

1 A* number of registered students is more than 50. It should not exceed 2 % of the 

total strength of the particular theory or lab course. The grade ‘A*’ is not 

awarded for projects /seminars. 

 

 

8 



2 E ‘E’ Grade will be awarded to a student who has scored marks less than the 

cutoff marks for ‘D’ Grade and has met the attendance criterion of the institute. 

Students who obtain an ‘E’ Grade will be eligible to appear in an additional 

examination. If they perform satisfactorily, they become eligible for getting the 

‘E’ grade converted to a ‘D’ Grade, otherwise, they will continue to have ‘E’ 

Grade. The student will have only one chance to appear for the additional 

examination for an ‘E’ Grade. The additional examination will be conducted 

within the first week of the next semester. The date of additional examination 

of Institute core courses for undergraduate students centrally notified, while for 

all other courses, the date would be announced by the respective course 

coordinators. A student can appear for a maximum of three such additional 

tests in a given semester. If a student cannot appear for the test due to any 

reason(s), he/she will not get any additional chance. If a student with ‘E’ grade 

in a course does not pass the course through the additional test, or obtains an 

‘F’ grade in the course, he/she has to repeat the course if it is a core course. In 

case the course is elective, the student may take the same course again or any 

other course. ‘E’ and ‘F’ Grades are not counted in the calculation of the CGPA; 

however, these are taken into account in the calculation of the SGPA. 

3 I An ‘I’ grade is temporarily awarded to a student on his/her request to denote 

incomplete performance in a course on approval of instructor. An ‘I’ grade is 

awarded in case missing an evaluation component due to absence on medical 

grounds or other special circumstances. Requests for ‘I’ grade should be made 

at the earliest but not later than the last day of major tests. All evaluation 

requirements for such students in the corresponding course(s) should be 

completed before the end of the first week of the next semester. Upon 

completion of all course requirements, the ‘I’ grade is converted to a regular 

grade. 

4 S This grade is awarded to a student with satisfactory performance in non-graded 

and Audit courses. If the stipulated requirements are not fulfilled, the 

unsatisfactory (U) grade is awarded. The grades obtained in an audit course 

are not considered in the calculation of SGPA or CGPA. 

5 X This grade is awarded to a student with satisfactory performance in thesis for 

continuation 

6 U This grade is awarded to a student with unsatisfactory performance in thesis, 

audit or non-graded courses. 

7 W This grade is awarded to a student who has opted to withdraw from a course. 

Withdrawal from a course is permitted until the date specified in the Academics 

Calendar. 

 

 

5.2 Procedure for declaration of results  

The following procedure would be followed for declaration of results and timeline would be as 

per Academic Calendar.  

1. Evaluation scheme to be displayed by instructors at the start of a semester:  

2. Display of answer sheets and all scores by instructors. 

3. Finalization of grades by instructors  

4. Grade moderation by department/institute level committee for department/institute-wide 

courses  

 

 

9 



5. Recommendation of grades by the Head of the Department after scrutiny of grades by a 

moderation committee 

6. Display of grades by Instructors 

7. Grade correction, if any, within 48 hours of display of grades after approval of the head 

of the department 

8. Approval of Grade by the Dean (UG/PG) 

9. Finalization of results by the Dean (UG/PG) 

10. Approval of results by the Chairman Senate 

11. Results once approved cannot be changed under any circumstance. In exceptional 

cases, the student may appeal to the Chairman, Senate for reconsideration, with formal 

justification. 

 

5.3 Grade Point Averages 

5.3.1​ ​Semester Grade Point Average 

The Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) is a weighted average of the grades earned by a 

student in all the courses credited by her/him and reflects her/his academic performance in the 

respective semester. If the grade points associated with the letter grades earned by a student 

in N courses registered during a semester are G​
1​, G​

2​, … G​
N​, and the corresponding credits C​

1​, 

C​
2​, … C​

N​, then the SGPA is given by the following formula:  

 

 

The SGPA is calculated on the basis of grades obtained in all courses, except audit courses and 

courses in which S/X grade is awarded, registered in a particular semester. 

 

5.3.2 Cumulative Grade Point Average 

The Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) indicates the overall academic performance of a 

student in all the courses registered up to the latest completed semester. The CGPA is 

computed similarly as the SGPA, considering all the courses in all semesters. The CGPA is 

calculated on the basis of all pass grades (A*, A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D), except audit courses and 

courses in which S/X grade is awarded, obtained in all completed semesters. 

 

The SGPA and CGPA calculation are based on credits earned/completed at IIT Jodhpur alone.  

 

 

6. GRADE CARD AND TRANSCRIPT 

A Grade Card shall be issued to each student at the end of each semester, and a Transcript at 

the end of the Programme. IIT Jodhpur Grade Card and Transcript will only indicate the courses, 

credits and grades completed at IIT Jodhpur and the total number of credits (without grades) 

earned in other academic institutions in a particular semester, if applicable. 

 

 

7. WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS IN SPECIAL CASES 

The rules and regulations procedures and requirements stated in this manual, other than those 

related to Admissions to the academic programmes, may be waived in special circumstances by 

the AC on the recommendation of the Department with the approval of Chairman, Senate. All 

such exceptions have to be reported to the Senate. 

 

 

 

 

10 



8. MAKE-UP EXAMINATIONS 

A student who has missed minor(s) or the major examination due to genuine reasons like 

illness etc. may be permitted to write a make-up examination for the missed components. The 

student should make an application to the Dean (Academics) through the course instructor 

within ten days from the date of the examination missed, explaining the reasons for their 

absence. Applications received after this period need not be entertained. The permission to take 

a make-up examination will be given under exceptional circumstances such as admission to a 

hospital due to illness. A student needs to produce the necessary document subject to one of 

the following categories: 

 

● Students residing in the Hostels should produce a Medical Certificate issued by the 

Medical Officer of the Institute that he/she was admitted to the Hospital during the 

period of the missed quiz/exam.  
● Students residing in the Hostels and taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are 

required to obtain written permission from the Medical Officer of the Institute Hospital 

before they proceed for such consultation.  
● Students residing in the hostels but taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are 

required to obtain an endorsement on the certificate of treatment by the Medical Officer 

of the Institute Hospital.  
● A student staying outside the Campus permanently / temporarily must produce a 

medical certificate from the Registered Medical Practitioner and the same should be duly 

endorsed by the parent/guardian. 
 

A slot-wise make-up examination for major will be held during the makeup / supplementary 

week as per Academic Calendar of the subsequent semester for those who are permitted to take 

the make-up examination. A student who misses this make-up examination will not normally be 

given another make-up examination. However, in exceptional cases of prolonged illness 

resulting in the student missing a make-up examination, the Chairman of the Senate, in 

consultation with the Dean of Academics may permit the student to appear for make-up 

examination any day before the end of the first week of the next semester. Under no 

circumstances, prorating can be done for the missed examinations or attendance. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12 



 

 

 

 

A. REGULATIONS FOR UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMMES 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

13 



9. UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMMES 

IIT Jodhpur currently offers Bachelor of Technology (B. Tech.) programs, and capability linked 

opportunities for undergraduate students to complete Minor/Interdisciplinary Area 

Specializations or Department Area Specialization. A student can also opt for M.Tech.(dual 

degree) in Departmental Area or Minor in Entrepreneurship leading to M.Tech. in 

Entrepreneurship or Department Area Specialization in Engineering innovation.  

 

 

10. UNDERGRADUATE ADMISSIONS 

10.1 B.Tech. Programmes 

10.1.1 General Admissions 

Admissions to the B.Tech. Programmes are made once a year in July through the all-India level 

Joint Entrance Examination (JEE) conducted by IITs. The procedures and other requirements for 

admission are specified in the JEE Information Brochure brought out every year. 

 

10.1.2 Cultural Exchange  Programmes 

Admissions are also offered to foreign nationals under the Cultural Exchange Fellowship 

Program of the Government of India, administered by Indian Council of Cultural Relations 

(ICCR), New Delhi. Persons interested in these programs are required to apply through the 

Indian High Commission/Embassy in their respective countries. 

 

10.1.3 Change/Enhancement of Program 

A student already admitted to a B.Tech. programme may switch to another department through 

branch change. A student can enhance his/her programme to a Minor/Interdisciplinary Area 

Specialization leading to M. Tech. in Minor/Interdisciplinary Area, Major/Department Area 

Specialization leading to M. Tech. in Department Area, Minor in Entrepreneurship, Minor in 

Entrepreneurship leading to M. Tech. in Entrepreneurship and Department Area Specialization in 

Engineering innovation (through Industrial Translation). The rules governing these changes are 

given in Section 18 (branch change) and Section 11.2 (for all others). 

 

10.2 Reservation Policy 

The reservation policy of Government of India will be followed. 

 

10.3 Student Exchange Program 

Student Exchange Program provides for a one/two-semester visit by students between the two 

academic institutions on a reciprocal basis. The visiting student must be a full-time student 

enrolled in a degree program in their Home Institution. The exchange program is open to 

full-time undergraduate and graduate students of each Home Institution. It will be executed as 

per the pre-approved arrangement (including an MoU) between the institutions. 

 

Selection of students under such program will be made by the DUGC after assessing the 

preparedness of students to meet the requirements of the planned coursework/research at the 

Host Institution and the relevance of the planned coursework/research to the enrolled degree 

program. A visiting student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or 

may use other academic facilities as per pre-approved arrangement (including an MoU). 

Under exchange program, a student of IIT Jodhpur can register at another academic institution 

in India or abroad with the expectation of credit transfer up to 20 credits per semester in lieu of 

the course work or research work through a pre-approved arrangement including an MoU. 

 

 

 

14 



On return, the student may apply to DUGC for waiver of credits from her/his program 

requirements which s/he thinks are equivalent to the courses successfully completed at the 

visited academic institution as an exchange student. With the application, the student must 

submit an official transcript of the grades obtained by her/him at the visited academic 

institution as an exchange student and other documents/material that the concerned DUGC may 

require for evaluation. The DUGC will determine, by whatever means it deems fit, the 

equivalent credits requirements for which the student may be given a waiver in her/his 

programme at IIT Jodhpur. DUGC will submit its recommendations to course equivalence 

committee for its approval. Moreover,  

 

● The credits/grades indicated in the grade sheet obtained from the academic institution in 

which the student has completed the courses should be used by the student as part of 

his/her transcripts. 

● IIT Jodhpur transcripts will only indicate the courses, credits and grades completed at IIT 

Jodhpur and the total number of credits (without grades) earned in other academic 

institutions in a particular semester. 

● The CGPA calculation based on credits earned/completed at IIT Jodhpur alone is to be 

considered for award of prizes. 

● The credits earned at the visited academic institutions will be taken into account for the 

calculation of minimum required credits for the award of the degree. 

 

10.4 Visiting Students  

A visiting student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or 

university in India or abroad, and who is officially permitted by that institute or university to 

complete part of his/her academic requirements at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose, the visiting 

student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other 

academic facilities. 

 

A person can be admitted as a visiting student on a duly sponsored application to the Dean 

(Academics). A visiting student may be admitted for a maximum period of one year. A visiting 

student will be required to pay all applicable fees depending upon the status, Program, and 

nationality.  

 

Students so admitted also will be governed by all rules, regulations, and discipline applicable to 

regular students of the Institute. 

 

10.5 Cancellation of Admission 

Students admitted provisionally or otherwise to any Program shall submit copies of their mark 

sheets, provisional certificates, etc. of the qualifying examination and other documents by the 

last date specified for the purpose in the Academic Calendar. The Senate reserves the right to 

cancel the admission of any student, who fails to submit the prescribed documents by the 

specified date or to meet other stipulated requirement(s). Also, the Senate reserves the right to 

cancel the admission at any later time, if it is found that the student had provided some false 

information or suppressed relevant information while seeking admission. 

 

10.6 Fulfillment of Admission Requirements 

Admission to any undergraduate Program requires that the applicant be eligible, go through the 

laid-down admission procedure, and pay the prescribed fees. The Senate should formally 

approve all admissions to the Undergraduate Programmes. 

 

 

 

15 



11. CURRICULUM AND ACADEMIC REQUIREMENTS 

 

11.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for UG 

Programmes 

The total credits for a course are calculated by taking into account the number of lectures, 

tutorial, and practical hours (L-T-P) assigned as given in Table 11.1. Each credit is associated 

with the number of contact hours and the expected number of self-learning hours (on an 

average) to be spent by the student for each contact hour to meet academic demand of the 

course. 

 

Table 11.1​ LTP-structure and credit assignment. 

Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond Total 

contact Hours​# Credits 

Contact Beyond Total (TC=TH/3) 

Hours Contact Hours 

(CH) Hours (BCH) (TH) 

1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 2 3 1 

1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 2 3 1 

1 hour of Lab 0-0-1 1 0.5 1.5 0.5 

1 hour of Project# 0-0-1 1 2 3 1 

#Contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, 

etc. 

 

11.2 Capability Linked Opportunities for Undergraduate Students 

A B.Tech. student can opt for one of the following capabilities Linked Opportunities 

1) Major/Department Specialization 

2) Interdisciplinary Specialization 

3) Minor  

4) B.Tech. + M.Tech. Dual Degree  

 

11.2.1 Eligibility Criteria for opting 

(a) Major/Department Specialization, Minor/Interdisciplinary Specialization  

A student should have earned a minimum 100 credits with the CGPA more than or equal to 6.0 

at the end on 6​th​ semester to opt for capability linked opportunity. 

 

(b) B.Tech. + M.Tech. Dual Degree in the chosen specialization 

Students who have already opted for Major/Department Specialization, Minor/Interdisciplinary 

Specialization can opt for dual-degree Programme from the eighth semester provided they have 

earned minimum 134 Credits with at least 6 CGPA at the end of the 7th semester.  

 

11.2.2 Minimum Credit requirements 

(a) Major/Department Specialization, Interdisciplinary Specialization and Minor 

A student needs to complete a total of 20 Credits in the Major/Department Specialization or 

Minor/Interdisciplinary Specialization area offered. 10 Credits out of 20 can be taken up as a 

part of Open electives whereas the student is required to opt for an additional 10 credits in the 

form of course overload. This will be indicated on the degree. 

 

Registration for Additional Courses for Major/Department Specialization, Interdisciplinary 

Specialization and Minor 

 

 

16 



Starting from the sixth semester, students having earned 80 credits with CGPA more than or 

equal to 6.0 are permitted to take up to 4 extra Credits as part of their normal load, which 

forms part of her/his additional learning component, every semester in addition to the 

prescribed courses for their degree. 

 

(b) B.Tech. + M.Tech. Dual Degree in the chosen specialization 

A student needs to complete a total of 56 Credits in the Minor, Department, or Interdisciplinary 

area offered. It will include credits earned for Major/Department or Minor/ Interdisciplinary area 

Specialization excluding the project credits. 

 

11.3 Course Categories and Academic requirements for various 

programmes 

Course Categories and Academic requirements for various programmes are given in the table 

below:  

Table 11.2​ Course Categories and Academic requirements 

S.N Course Type Course Category  B.Tech. B.Tech. Dual 

.  Regular with Degree 

Specialization  

1 Institute Core (I) Engineering (IE) 34 34 34 

 Science (IS) 16 16 16 

Humanities (IH) 12 12 12 

2 Programme Linked (L) Science (LS) 7 7 7 

3 Programme Core (P) Programme 50 50 50 

Compulsory (PC) 

Programme Electives 18 18 18 

(PE) 

B.Tech. Project (PP) 3 3 3 

4 Open (O) Electives (OE) 10 0 0 

5 Specialization Compulsory (SC) 0 8 8 

(Major/Minor/Department/ Elective (SE) 0 12 12# 

Interdisciplinary) (S) 

6 M.Tech. (M) in Minor, Compulsory (MC) 0 0 9 

Department, or Electives (ME) 0 0 5 

Interdisciplinary Area Project (MP) 0 0 16 

Open Electives (MO) 0 0 6 

Total Graded 150 160 196 

7 Non-Graded (N) Humanities (NH) 6 6 6 

Engineering (NE) 3 3 3 

Design/Practical 6 6 6 

Experience (ND)  

Total Graded+Non Graded  165 175 211 

# Must not include any project course 

 

11.4 Maximum Duration of the Program 

The maximum duration for the completion B.Tech. Programs shall be 14 registered semesters.  

 

11.5 Academic Performance Requirements 

The minimum requirements on credits earned for continuation in a B. Tech. Programme at the 

end of the second registered semester is specified in the following table: 

 

 

17 



 

Table 11.3​ Criteria for continuation at the end of the second registered semester 

Description Minimum number of credits to be earned 

GEN/OBC/GEN-EWS SC/ST/PD 

Minimum for Continuation 18 14 

 

If a student does not meet the criteria specified in Table 11.3, he/she may opt to restart the 

programme or else their registration will be terminated. The restart will be permitted only once. 

Dean (UG/PG) should propose a guideline for mentoring the student under probation. Dean of 

Students should also involve in the process.  

If a student chooses to restart after the first two registered semesters, then the credits earned 

and semesters registered till that point will not be counted towards the graduation 

requirements. The re-start will be indicated on the transcript. 

 

11.5.1 Criteria to put a student on Academic Probation​: 
●  From the third semester onward if a student fails to earn a minimum of 12 credits in 

any registered semester, then he/she will be placed on academic probation. 

● A student placed on probation shall be monitored, including mandatory attendance in 

classes, special tutorials and mentoring. Mentoring would comprise structured guidance 

under a senior student. 

● If a student is on academic probation for two consecutive registered semesters, then 

his/her registration will be terminated. 

● If a student earns less than or equal to 15 credits in any registered semester a warning 

shall be given to him/her and intimation be sent to the parents. 

● The two semesters allowed for the academic probation should be counted towards the 

total duration allowed for the program. 

 

11.6 Assistantship for B.Tech. -M. Tech. Dual-degree Programmes 

The students of dual-degree programmes will be considered for award of institute research/ 

teaching assistantship if they have earned 150 credits by the end of the eighth semester. Only 

those students who have either qualified GATE or have a CGPA more than 8.0 will be eligible for 

this assistantship. The assistantship will be provided for a maximum period of 14 months 

beginning from the summer semester following the eighth semester, provided the student is 

registered for M.Tech. Major Project in that semester. A student availing assistantship will be 

required to provide 8 hours of assistance per week besides his/ her normal academic work. For 

continuation of assistantship, a student will need to secure SGPA of 6.5.  

 

A student receiving assistantship will be eligible for a total of 30 days leave during the 

14-month period. He/she will not be entitled to mid-semester breaks, winter and summer 

vacations. 

 

 

12. UG REGISTRATION 

 

12.1 Summer Courses 

Students can register for courses during summer up to a maximum of Eight Credits on payment 

of registration fee at prescribed rates. The summer term is not a regular semester and only 

academically deficient students (who have low CGPA and/or fewer credits than advised by the 

curriculum till that point in the programme), Major students, Minor students, and such students 

 

 

18 



who are short of maximum Eight Credits to complete all graduation requirements may register 

during this period.  

 

For core courses, only students with failed backlog may be considered for summer registration. 

In case any vacancies are left in the courses being offered during the summer term once the 

requirements of the above categories of students are fulfilled, other students may register for 

these courses to fulfil some of their graduation requirements in advance.  

 

The total number of contact hours for the courses remains the same as that during the regular 

semesters, and therefore the courses run at an accelerated pace. The evaluation and grading 

patterns also remain the same as during the regular semesters. 

 

12.2 Limits on Registration  

 

● An undergraduate student should register for a minimum of 12 credits in a semester.  
● The maximum number of credits permitted for a UG student in a semester is 25.  
● An undergraduate student may be permitted to register for a maximum of four credits 

per semester for independent-study or self-study course 
 

12.3 Exceptions to Regular Rules regarding Academic Load 

Under-load: Students who are identified as academically deficient (on academic probation) 

may register for a maximum of 16 credits. 

 

Over-load: ​Overloading may be allowed only for students who are not on academic probation 

and satisfy one of the following criteria: 

● Students are allowed to overload only when they need 70 or less additional credits to 

complete all the requirements of their programme. 
● Beyond the second semester, any student with a CGPA of 7.5 or higher may be allowed 

to overload.  
 

12.4 Change of Registration from B. Tech. Programme to B.Tech.- M. 

Tech. dual degree Programme 

A B.Tech. student having opted for major/minor specialization with CGPA 6 or more at the end 

of the seventh semester and fulfilling requirements mentioned earlier may be allowed to switch 

to B.Tech.- M. Tech. dual degree program in the chosen specialization at the beginning of the 

eighth semester. The M.Tech degree can be any one of the approved programmes of the 

institute. All requirements of M.Tech. Degree will be applicable to all such students. All such 

changes of registration shall be reported to the Senate. 

 

 

13.  EVALUATION OF SPECIAL UG ONLY COURSES 

 

13.1 B.Tech. Project Evaluation 

● DUGC will appoint a committee for B.Tech. Project evaluation. The committee will ensure 

that Award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy.  
● The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project.  
● DUGC will form the evaluation criterion and declare it to students. 

 

 

 

19 



13.2  Composition of Department Undergraduate Committee (DUGC)  

● The DUGC will be constituted of all UG Faculty Advisors and Head of Department. The 

Head of Department will be the chairperson and one of the faculty advisors would be the 

convenor. 

 

13.2  Engineering Innovation  

● At the completion of an Engineering Innovation Project the student will submit a report 

which will be evaluated by duly appointed examiner(s) by DUGC.  
● The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project/ 

Entrepreneurship and a letter grade is awarded. 
● Evaluation policy has to be declared by the concerned department from the first day of 

the class.  
 

13.3 Design Project Evaluation 

● At the completion of a project, the student will submit a project report which will be 

evaluated by duly appointed examiner(s) by DUGC.  
● The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project 

and S or U grade is awarded.  
● Evaluation policy has to be declared by the concerned department from the first day of 

the class.  
 

13.4 Conduct and Evaluation of B.Tech. -M. Tech Dual Degree Project 

● Allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the 

students and supervisor(s). 
● The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the eighth 

semester. 
● Coordinator, M. Tech. Program would advise until the student is assigned to a regular 

supervisor(s).  
● The evaluation criterion would be the same as Section 25. 

 

13.5  Entrepreneurship Project 

● At the completion of Entrepreneurship, the student will submit a report which will be 

evaluated by duly appointed examiner(s) by Dean (Academics-UG)/Associate Dean 

(Academics-UG).  
● The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the 

Entrepreneurship and a letter grade is awarded. 
 

 

14. TERMINATION 

14.1 Termination from B.Tech. Program 

A student may be terminated from the B.Tech. Programme by AC, if the student  

(a)  Is absent without authorized leave of absence for eight weeks or more in a semester; OR 

(b)  Fails to report and register by the last date of registration without a bonafide reason; OR 

(c)  Violates the code of conduct, involves in ragging, etc. as confirmed by a Committee 

constituted for the purpose; OR 

(d)  Does not earn the prescribed minimum number of credits within the maximum duration of 

the program; OR 

(e)  Is on academic probation for two consecutive semesters. 

 

 

 

20 



14.2 Appeal against Termination 

A student, who is terminated from the B.Tech. Program can appeal to the Chairman, Senate, for 

reconsideration. While making such an appeal, the student is expected to give reasons for poor 

academic performance and/or why the termination should be reconsidered. The Senate shall 

take a final decision after considering all the available inputs. But, the Senate will not entertain 

any further appeal for review, unless substantial additional information is brought to its notice. 

 

 

15. LEAVE RULES 

Application for leave of absence should be addressed to the Convener DUGC, and submitted 

with a medical certificate, if applicable. Usually, leave must not be availed of without prior 

approval of the DUGC. 

 

15.1 Mid-Semester Recess and Vacation 

Undergraduate students are entitled to avail of mid-semester recess and vacation as specified in 

the Academic Calendar. 

 

15.2 Short Leave 

A student may be granted leave of absence during the semester for a maximum of 10 days on 

medical grounds, and for 5 days for any other valid reason.  

 

15.3 Semester Withdrawal 

It may be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. Absence for a period 

of four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester. 

DUGC can approve and intimate Office of Academics regarding the leave of the student for 

records. In case, the leave extends beyond a semester, it can only be approved through the 

Academic Committee. Semester withdrawal on the medical ground will not be counted towards 

the maximum permissible duration of the programme for the student. 

 

15.4 Academic Leave 

To help students broaden their horizons and gain course/work experience, she/he may be 

permitted to proceed to other academic institutes/ Industry/ R&D organization in India or 

abroad. Academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons, such as 

(a)  Fieldwork 

(b)  Experimental work/training using specialized facility not available at IITJ 

(c)  Entrepreneurship initiative  

(d)  Engineering innovation  

(e)  Exchange program – as part of an exchange program with an academic institution in 

India or abroad 

(f) Internship work 

All such requests must be evaluated and approved by DUGC before the leave is granted. 

A student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one summer term and two 

semesters on academic leave. 

A student during academic leave can earn a maximum of 20 credits per semester as certified by 

the DUGC and approved by the Course Equivalence Committee. 

 

 

16. BRANCH CHANGE 

(a)  An undergraduate student is eligible to apply for branch change at the end of the second 

semester only, provided the student satisfies the following criteria: 

 

 

21 



1. Secured a CGPA, at the end of the second semester, of:  

i. Greater than or equal to 7.0 for SC/ST and PD applicants 

ii. Greater than or equal to 8.0 for other applicants 

2. Completed all prescribed course credits for the first two semesters (including the 

non-graded courses). 

3. No backlog at the end of the second semester. 

(b)  The student should have no disciplinary action against him/her. 

(c)  Change of the branch will be permitted strictly in the order of merit as determined by 

CGPA at the end of the second semester. Each available seat may be occupied by 

students of any category. For students of SC/ST/PD category, concession in eligibility 

criteria is given as per rule (a). 

(d)  In case more than one student applying for branch change have the same CGPA, the tie 

shall be resolved on the basis of JEE ranks of such applicants. 

(e)  In making a change of branch, the strength of a branch should not fall below ​85% of 

the sanctioned strength and should not go above ​115%​ of the sanctioned strength. 

(f) The conditions mentioned in item (a) above will not be insisted upon for change to a 

branch in which a vacancy exists with reference to the sanctioned strengths, and the 

concerned student was eligible as per JEE Rank for admission to that branch at the time 

of entry to IIT Jodhpur. 

(g)  Notwithstanding any of the conditions listed above, a student with CGPA of ​9 or more at 

the end of the second semester will be allowed to move to a branch of his/her choice. 

 

 

17. REQUIREMENTS FOR GRADUATION 

A student is deemed to have completed the requirements for graduation if she/he has met the 

conditions laid down in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4. 

 

17.1 Minimum Duration of Residence 

Minimum Duration of Residence is given in the table below: 

 

Table 17.1​ Minimum residential requirement 

S.No. Program  Minimum Duration of Residence 

(in semesters) 

1. B. Tech. (including 6 

minor/department/interdisciplinary area 

specialization) 

2. B. Tech. – M.Tech. 8 

 

17.2 Academic 

The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she/he has earned 

the minimum credits as per Table 11.2 in Section 11.3 for all degrees​. 
 

17.3 Payment of Fees and Dues 

The degree will be awarded after obtaining No Dues Clearance from all concerned sections as 

deemed necessary by Dean (Academics). 

 

17.4 No case of Disciplinary Action 

The student shall not be considered to have completed the Academic Requirements if there is 

any case of indiscipline pending against her/him.  

 

 

22 



 

17.5 Completion of engagement in NCC, NSS or NSO 

The student should have completed extra-curricular activity like performing arts, sports, 

National Cadet Corps, National Service Schemes, and National Sports Organisation for a period 

of at least two semesters during their B.Tech. Program. 

 

17.6 Award of Degrees 

17.6.1 Provisional Certificate 

A student who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, can 

be provided a provisional certificate by the office of Dean (Academics) on the approval of 

Chairman, Senate. Certificate will have mention of major, minor, Department or 

Interdisciplinary Specialization wherever applicable. 

 

17.6.2 Degree Certificate 

A student who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, is 

recommended by the Senate to the Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate 

degree in the ensuing convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the BOG accords its 

approval. The certificate will have mention of major, minor, Department or Interdisciplinary 

Specialization wherever applicable. 

 

 

18. AMENDMENTS 

Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the 

right to modify/amend without notice, the curricula, procedures, requirements, and rules 

pertaining to its B.Tech. Programs. 

 

  

 

 

23 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B. REGULATIONS FOR POSTGRADUATE PROGRAMMES 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

24 



19. POSTGRADUATE PROGRAMMES 

The Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur currently offers the following Postgraduate 

programmes. 

1. Master of Science (M.Sc.)  

2. Dual degree: M.Sc.-M.Tech. 

3. Master of Technology (M.Tech.)  

4. Dual degree:  M.Tech.-PhD.  

5. Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) 

 

 

20. POSTGRADUATE ADMISSIONS 

The process of admission for all the programs offered by the Institute normally is underway 

during April-May for Semester 1 and during November-December for Semester 2. In addition, 

the department may process applications for admissions to PhD programs on a continuous basis 

and admit students as per the existing procedure. 

 

20.1 Categories of Admission 

A candidate can be admitted in any one of the following categories 

i. Full-time regular 

ii. Full-time sponsored 

iii. Part-time  

iv. External 

v. Executive 

However, all categories are not applicable for all PG Programs. Further, programmes can be 

offered in a combination of these modes (like fully sponsored part-time program). 

 

i) Full-time Regular 

In campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. A student 

supported by a project of the institute will be considered a full-time regular student. 

 

ii) Full-time Sponsored  

In campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. The candidate 

is sponsored either by his/her employer or by self. A self-sponsored candidate must have two 

years of relevant industrial/R&D/academic experience. 

 

iii) Part-time 

A part-time student is a working professional who, while employed, attend regular classes as 

per the schedule of the Institute. The student must be employed in the neighbourhood of IIT 

Jodhpur. The student must produce a NOC from the employer for pursuing the programme at 

IIT Jodhpur. The student can register only for a limited number of credits as compared to a 

full-time regular student.  

 

iv) External  

A student working in an industry/R&D establishment/academic institution which is equipped 

with the necessary research and library facilities. The employer must relieve the student to stay 

in the campus to complete the minimum residency requirements.  

 

v) Executive (only for M. Tech.) 

A professional who can carry out/complete the programme requirement in  

1. An accelerated fashion (minimum in 12 months), OR  

2. Accumulates credits as per convenience and petitions a degree in a maximum of 6 years. 

 

 

25 



3. The part-time or full-time mode by attending courses offered in synchronized remote 

contact mode and limited direct interaction 

 

20.2 Eligibility​ ​for Admission  

(a) The eligibility conditions given below are the absolute minimum. Departments may 

prescribe any requirements over and above, subject to the approval of the Senate. 

(b) The number of admissions that can be made to any program shall be decided by the 

Senate from time to time. 

(c) Reservation of seats for various reserved categories shall be prescribed by the Board of 

Governors. 

 

20.2.1 Admission to M. Sc. Program (Regular) 

The admission to the M.Sc. Programs offered by the Institute will be through any one of the 

following two avenues. 

(a) The applicants qualified through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by 

IITs. 

(b) The applicants having a bachelor’s degree in any relevant discipline (3- or 4-year 

program) may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT 

Jodhpur. 

The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% 

for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA 

of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding 

proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC 

category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a first-class as specified by the university/institute. 

 

20.2.2 Admission to M Sc – M Tech Dual Degree Program (Regular) 

The admission to the M. Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree Programs offered by the Institute will be 

through any one of the following two avenues. 

(a) The applicants qualified through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by 

IITs. 

(b) The applicants having a bachelor’s degree in any relevant discipline (3- or 4-year 

program) may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT 

Jodhpur. 

The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% 

for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA 

of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding 

proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC 

category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a first-class as specified by the university/institute. 

 

20.2.3 Admission to M Tech Program (Regular)  

(a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program) or 

a master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Sciences, Agricultural Sciences 

and Veterinary Sciences or in a related field 

(b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as 

specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for 

SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when 

the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST) 

on a scale of 8) or a first-class as specified by the university/institute. 

(c) The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD 

circular or have qualified an equivalent National Examination or have qualified in the 

written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur. 

 

 

26 



 

20.2.4 Admission to MTech Program​ ​(Executive/Part-time/ External/Sponsored) 

(a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4-year program) or 

a master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and 

Veterinary Science or in a related field. 

(b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as 

specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for 

SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when 

the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST) 

on a scale of 8) or a first-class as specified by the university/institute. 

(c)  The applicant must have a minimum of ​two years of work experience (after qualifying 

degree) in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to 

the program. However, the credit accumulation for the program may start immediately 

after the qualifying degree. Petitioning for the degree can happen only 1 year after 

registration. 

(d) The applicant must qualify the written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur. 

 

20.2.5 Admission to M .Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program (Regular) 

(a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4-year program) or 

a master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and 

Veterinary Science or in a related field 

(b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as 

specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for 

SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when 

the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4 for SC/ST) 

on a scale of 8) or a first-class as specified by the university/institute. 

(c) The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD 

circular or have qualified an equivalent National Examination or have qualified in the 

written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur. 

 

20.2.6 Admission to Ph.D. Program (Regular) 

(a) Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other 

academic program in India or abroad, and shall not be a full-time or part-time employee 

of any organization in India or abroad.  

(b) The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural 

science, science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at 

least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),  

OR 

(c) The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with 

MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or 

CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree, 

OR 

(d) The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum four-year duration in 

engineering or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary 

science or equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for 

GEN/OBC  (65% for SC/ST). 

 

20.2.7 Admission under any special scheme like Quality Improvement Programme 

(QIP), Defence Personnel  

The procedures and criteria for admission of these candidates can be decided with the approval 

of Chairman, Senate.  

 

 

 

27 



20.2.8. Admission of Indian Nationals Residing Abroad (INRA) and Foreign Nationals  

INRA candidates must have been residing abroad continuously for at least one year at the time 

of applying for admission.  

 

The applications of INRA and foreign nationals may be processed by the departments as and 

when they are received or according to any schedule convenient to the department. The 

applications should be scrutinized to make sure that, both in terms of qualifications and 

attainment they are comparable with the candidates admitted in the general category. 

Department will conduct VC based interview for ascertaining suitability of the candidate. 

 

The applications of foreign nationals, who are sponsored by the Indian Council of Cultural 

Relations (ICCR) will be scrutinized by the department concerned to assess their suitability for 

admission to the programme. The department's recommendation will be sent to the 

Chairperson, Senate through the Chairperson, AC.  

 

20.2.9 Admission to Ph.D (sponsored/external/part-time) 

(a) Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other 

academic program in India or abroad.  

(b) The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural 

science, science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at 

least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),  

OR 

(c) The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with 

MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or 

CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree, 

OR 

(d) The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum four-year duration in 

engineering or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary 

science or equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for 

GEN/OBC  (65% for SC/ST). 

(e) The applicant must have a minimum of ​two years of work experience (after qualifying 

degree) in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to 

the program.  

(f) The applicant must qualify the written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur. 

 

20.3  Admission of Non-Degree Students  

A non-degree student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or 

university in India or abroad, and who is officially sponsored by that institute or university to 

complete part of his/her academic requirements at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose, the 

non-degree student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use 

other academic facilities.  

 

Any candidate can be admitted as a casual student for specific courses provided the candidate 

satisfies the minimum eligibility criteria specified in Section 20.2. The application must be 

routed through the office of Dean R&D.  

 

Students so admitted will be governed by all rules, regulations and discipline of the Institute.  

 

20.4 Reservation Policy 

The reservation policy of Government of India will be followed. 

 

 

 

28 



 

21 PG REGISTRATION  

21.1 Limits on Registration  

Maximum and minimum number of credits a student can register in different programs:  

● M.Sc.: An M.Sc. student can register for a maximum of 24 credits and a minimum of 10 

credits in a semester.  
● M.Tech.: An M.Tech. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per 

Table 21.1.  
 

Table 21.1 Maximum and Minimum Credits an M.Tech. student can register for during the 

Regular semester/Summer Term  

 M.Tech. student registered under Maximum Minimum 

different categories Credits Credits 

Regular Semester Executive (Accelerated) 24 10 

Executive (Normal) 17 10 

Executive (Slow-Paced) 12 3 

Executive (Part Time) 12 3 

Full-time (Regular/Sponsored) 17 10 

External 20 10 

Part-time 12 3 

Summer Term Executive (Accelerated) 16 0 

Executive (Normal) 9 0 

Executive (Slow-Paced) 6 0 

Full-time (Regular) 9 5 

Full-time (Sponsored) 9 0 

External 9 0 

Part-time 6 0 

 

● M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree/Direct Ph.D. (Joining after B.Tech.) - The maximum and 

minimum credits that an M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree student can register are equivalent 

to that of an M.Tech. (Regular/External/Part-time) student.  
● Ph.D.: A Ph.D. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per Table 

21.2.  
 

Table 21.2 Maximum and Minimum Credits a Ph.D. student (Regular) can register for during 

the Regular semester  

Ph.D. student registered under different Maximum Credits Minimum Credits 

categories  

Full-time Regular 12 6 

External 12 6 

Part-Time 12 3 

 

21.1.1 Registration Kept Alive (RKA) 

A student admitted to an M.Tech program who has at least completed minimum credit 

requirement of the first semester, can keep his studentship alive while he is pursuing any 

professional activity, by opting for RKA in subsequent semesters. The candidate must indicate 

his intent of RKA before the last date of late registration through DRC to Dean(academic). The 

candidate has to pay appropriate registration fees for RKA status. A student can maintain RKA 

status for a maximum of 6 semesters.  

 

 

29 



 

 

21.2 Change of Registration from M.Tech. Programme to M.Tech.-Ph.D. 

dual degree Programme  

 A regular student registered for the M.Tech. programme having CGPA 8 or more at the end of 

the second semester may be allowed to switch to M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree program till the 

end of the third semester. As a special case, a student can switch to a dual degree in the fourth 

semester with the approval of DRC, provided his/her CGPA is 8 or more, who will then be 

required to complete his/her candidacy requirements by the end of the fifth semester.  

All conditions of M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree program will be applicable to all such students. All 

such changes of registration shall be reported to the Senate.  

 

21.3 Change of Registration from Part-Time M.Tech. to Part-Time Ph.D. 

Program 

A part-time M.Tech. student having CGPA 8 or more after completion of at least 24 credits may 

be allowed to change his/her registration to the Ph.D. program. The credits earned will be 

counted towards his/her Ph.D. course work requirements.  

 

21.4 Change of Registration from Full-Time to Part-Time/External Ph.D. 

Programme   

 A student admitted to a full-time Ph.D. programme may be permitted to change to a part-time 

Ph.D. programme. A student requesting such a conversion must:  

i) have successfully completed his/her candidacy requirement; 

ii) get the request endorsed by the supervisor(s) and the DRC;  

iii) produce a "No Objection" Certificate from his/her employer for carrying out the research 

work.  

 

21.5 Maximum Duration of a Program 

● M.Sc.​ - 8 registered semester 
● M.Tech. (Regular and Part-time/External/Executive) ​- 12 registered semesters 

which may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive (RKA) after 

completion of the first semester. Tuition fee post RKA will be same as that of sponsored 

candidates.  
● Ph.D. and M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree (Regular and Part-time/External) - 14 

registered semesters which may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive 

(RKA) after completion of the two semesters. Tuition fee post RKA will be same as that 

of sponsored candidates.  
● Students may request for RKA to Dean (Academics) through DRC.  

 

21.5 Course Registration 

Students will be eligible to register for courses as per the criterion specified in Section 21.1 and 

Table 4.4. 

 

The DRC/ IRC must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course 

during her/his Masters or Bachelors program. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

30 



 

22 ACADEMIC REQUIREMENTS 

 

22.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for PG 

Programmes 

The total credits for a course are calculated by taking into account the number of lectures, 

tutorial, and practical hours (L-T-P) assigned as given in Table 22.1 and 22.2 for M.Sc. and 

M.Tech. Ph.D. programmes respectively. Each credit is associated with the number of contact 

hours and the expected number of self-learning hours (on an average) to be spent by the 

student for each contact hour to meet academic demand of the course. 

 

Table 22.1​ LTP-structure and credit assignment for M.Sc. 

Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond Total 

contact Hours​# Credits 

Contact Beyond Total (TC=TH/3) 

Hours Contact Hours 

(CH) Hours (BCH) (TH) 

1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 2 3 1 

1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 2 3 1 

1 hour of Lab 0-0-1 1 0.5 1.5 0.5 

1 hour of Project# 0-0-1 1 2 3 1 

#Contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, 

etc. 

 

Table 22.2​ LTP-structure and credit assignment for M.Tech./Ph.D. 

Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond Total 

contact Hours​# Credits 

Contact Beyond Total (TC=TH/4) 

Hours Contact Hours 

(CH) Hours (BCH) (TH) 

1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 3 4 1 

1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 3 4 1 

1 hour of Lab 0-0-1 1 1 2 0.5 

1 hour of Project# 0-0-1 1 3 4 1 

1 hour of Thesis 0-0-1 1 3 4 1 

(Ph.D.) 

#Contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, 

etc. 

 

22.2 Course categories for Masters’ programmes 

1) Compulsory Course (MC) 

2) Programme Elective (ME) 

3) Open Elective (MO) 

4) Project works (MP) 

5) Non-graded (NG) 

 

22.3 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Sc. Students  

Course categories and academic requirements for M.Sc. students are given below in Table 22.3. 

 

 

 

31 



 

Table 22.3​ Programs/ Credits to be earned for MSc students 

Programs Minimum Credits to be earned 

 
MC ME MO MP Total 

M.Sc. (Chemistry) 38 18 06 15 77 

M.Sc. (Mathematics) 38 18 06 15 77 

M.Sc. (Physics) 38 18 06 15 77 

 

22.4 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Tech. Students/ Executive 

M.Tech. 

Course categories and academic requirements for M.Tech. students are given below in Table 

22.4. 

 

Table 22.4​ Minimum Credits to be earned For MTech students 

Programs Minimum Credits to be earned 

 MC ME MO MP NG Total 

M.Tech (Sensors and Internet of Things) 19 17 06 16 4 62 

M.Tech (Cyber Physical System) 18 18 06 16 4 62 

M.Tech (Thermofluids Engineering) 17 17 06 16 4 60 

M.Tech (Advanced Manufacturing 19 15 06 16 4 60 

Engineering and Design) 

M.Tech (Metallurgical and Materials 16 18 06 16 4 60 

Engineering) 

M.Tech (Artificial Intelligence) 18 18 06 16 4 62 

M.Tech (Computer Science and 18 18 06 16 4 62 

Engineering) 

M.Tech (Bioscience and Bioengineering) 18 17 06 16 4 61 

M.Tech (Data and Computational 20 15 06 16 4 61 

Sciences) 

 

22.5 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Sc. - M.Tech. Dual Degree 

Minimum credit requirements for M.Sc. - M.Tech. Dual Degree is the cumulative sum of credit 

requirements for respective M.Sc. program and M.Tech. program as mentioned in Sections 22.3 

and 22.4.  

 

22.6 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Tech. - Ph.D. Dual Degree  

Course categories and academic requirements for MTech - PhD dual degree students are given 

below in Table 22.5. 

 

Table 22.5​ Minimum Credits to be earned for dual degree MTech and PhD students 

Programs Minimum Credits to be earned 

 MC ME MO MP NG Total 

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree 19 17 06 16 4 62 

(Sensors and Internet of Things) 

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Cyber 18 18 06 16 4 62 

Physical System) 

 

 

32 



M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree 17 17 06 16 4 60 

(Communication and Signal 

Processing) 

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree 17 17 06 16 4 60 

(Thermofluids Engineering) 

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree 17 17 06 16 4 60 

(Manufacturing Engineering) 

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Design 17 17 06 16 4 60 

Engineering) 

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree 16 18 06 16 4 60 

(Metallurgical and Materials 

Engineering) 

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree 18 18 06 16 4 62 

(Computer Science and 

Engineering) 

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree 18 18 06 16 4 62 

(Artificial Intelligence) 

M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree 18 17 06 16 4 61 

(Bioscience and Bioengineering) 

 

The DRC/ IRC must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during 

Bachelors program and take necessary corrective action by suggesting alternative courses 

 

22.7 Academic Credit Requirements for Ph.D. Students 

The minimum credits to be earned through courses is listed in Table 22.6.  

 

Table 22.6​ Credit Requirements for PhD students 

S.No. Ph.D. in  With Minimum Minimum 

Credits Credits 

through through Thesis 

Course Work 

Work 

1. Engineering M.Tech., M.E. or M.Sc. (Engineering) 12 48 

discipline/ in an Engineering discipline  

IDRPs M.Sc. degree  in a Science discipline 30 48 

B.Tech., B.E. or B.Sc. (Engineering) 30 48 

in an Engineering discipline 

2. Science, M.Sc., M.A. and M.Phil. degree in a 12 48 

Humanities or Science, Humanities or Social 

Social Science Science discipline 

discipline  

 

 

22.8 Academic Performance Requirements 

22.8.1 Minimum performance for continuation and Graduation in a program 

The minimum CGPA requirement for continuation and graduation in a program is given in below 

Table 22.7. 

 

 

 

 

 

33 



Table 22.7​ Minimum CGPA requirements  

Sr. Program Continuation in For graduation 

No. Programme 

1 M.Sc. (only graduation Refer 22.8.2 5.0 

requirement) 

2 M.Tech.  5.0 5.0 

3 Dual Degree (M.Sc. and 5.0 5.0 

M.Tech.) 

4 Dual Degree (M.Tech. and 7.0 7.0 

Ph.D.) 

5 Ph.D. 7.0 7.5 at the completion of 

course work 

 

22.8.2 Continuing criteria for M.Sc.  

M.Sc.- ​The student must earn at least 20 credits at the end of the second semester for 

continuation in the program.  

 

22.8.3 Minimum performance for continuation Assistantship/Fellowship 

The minimum CGPA requirement for continuation Assistantship/Fellowship is given in below 

Table 22.8 

 

Table 22.8​ Minimum CGPA requirements for Continuation of Assistantship/ 

Fellowship 

Sr. No. Program Continuation of Assistantship/ 

Fellowship 

1 M.Tech.  6.5 

2 Dual Degree (M.Tech. and Ph.D.) 7.0 

3 Ph.D. 7.0 

 

 

23. LEAVE RULES 

Application for leave of absence should be addressed to the Convener DRC, and submitted with 

a medical certificate, if applicable. Usually, leave must not be availed of without prior approval 

of the DRC. 

 

23.1 Leave 

A maximum of 30 days in an academic year (including leave on medical grounds + mid 

semester break). The student must apply for leave in advance even during the summer/winter 

term or mid-semester break. 

A PhD student cannot avail leave for more than 15 days at a stretch  

An M.Tech./M.Sc. student cannot avail leave for more than 10 days at a stretch 

The leave beyond 30 days in an Academic Year may be granted in exceptional cases by DRC 

without assistantship during that period.  

 

23.2 Other Leaves 

Maternity leave for Ph.D. students is sanctioned as per the directives of MHRD. It will not be 

counted towards the maximum permissible duration of the programme. 

Any other leave may also be permissible as per the guidelines of MHRD.  

 

 

 

 

34 



23.3 Semester Withdrawal  

May be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. Absence for a period of 

four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester. 

In all such cases, the fellowship will be stopped with immediate effect and it will be continued 

for only after the student rejoins the institute. DRC can approve and intimate Office of 

Academics regarding the leave of the student for records. In case, the leave extends beyond a 

semester, it can only be approved through the Academic Committee. Semester withdrawal on 

the medical ground will not be counted towards the maximum permissible duration of the 

programme for the student. 

 

23.4 Academic Leave  

Academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons, such as 

1. Fieldwork  

2. Library work- because of a specialized collection at a particular library 

3. Experimental work/training using specialized facility not available at IITJ 

4. Attending conferences/workshops/summer/winter schools/symposium  

5. Collaborative work as part of joint M.Tech./Ph.D. supervision 

6. Collaborative work for a specific problem related to his ongoing Ph.D programme as 

indicated in  his research proposal 

7. Exchange program – as part of an exchange program with a sister institution in India or 

abroad 

 

All such requests must be evaluated and approved by SRC/DRC/IRC before the leave is granted. 

SRC/DRC/IRC must also make recommendations regarding continuation of fellowship during 

academic leave. 

● A student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one year on academic leave. 
● A student during academic leave can earn a maximum of 12 credits per semester as 

certified by SRC and approved by DRC. 
 

 

24. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE 

Financial assistantship/scholarship will be provided to the eligible students admitted 

under regular full-time program. The eligibility criteria are as per the following: 

 

24.1 M.Sc. Program 

Merit-cum-Means fellowship as per Institute norms.  

 

24.2 M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual-Degree Program  

A student having completed minimum credit requirements of an M.Sc. program at the end of 

the second year with  

(a) CGPA>=8  

OR 

(b) have qualified GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund. 

 

24.3 M.Tech. Program 

A regular M.Tech. student with GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund. A 

student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines.  

 

 

 

 

 

35 



24.4 Executive M Tech Program  

Students admitted in this category will not be provided any financial assistance from the 

Institute. 

 

24.5 M.Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program  

Rules and regulations governing financial assistance for dual degree students will be at par with 

regular Ph.D. students.  

 

24.6 Ph.D. Program 

A regular Ph.D. student admitted to the Institute will be eligible for financial assistance as per 

the norms of IIT Jodhpur.  

(a)  A candidate having B.Tech./B.S. (four-year program)/Master's degree with 

GATE/NET(JRF)/NBHM (or equivalent) can have financial assistance as per MHRD 

norms/or equivalent applicable for non-science departments. 

(b) The requirement of GATE is exempted for an applicant with M.Tech or equivalent 

post-bachelor's degree 

(c) A student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines. 

A Ph.D. student would be eligible for enhancement in the scholarship after two years provided 

the student has met qualifier requirement. The enhanced fellowship will commence from the 

date of completion of both the conditions. No arrears will be provided due to delay in completing 

the qualifier requirement.  

The Teaching/Research Assistantship of a Ph.D. student shall stop from the day of submission of 

the Thesis. 

 

 

25. RULES AND REGULATION FOR CONDUCT AND 

EVALUATION OF M. TECH./M.SC. PROJECT  

● Allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the 

students and supervisor(s). 
● The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the first 

semester. 
● Coordinator, M. Tech. Program would advise until the student is assigned to a regular 

supervisor(s).  
● Each semester a letter grade will be awarded after examination by a committee 

consisting of DRC, supervisor(s) and two members conversant with the field of research 

with at least one member external to the department (maybe outside the Institute also). 

DRC will appoint examiners in consultation with the supervisor. The same committee 

may examine more than one thesis. External member can be on VC. DRC will ensure 

that Award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy.  
● A regular full-time student must register for M.Tech Project Part-1 in the summer 

semester following 2​nd
  semester. He must obtain a satisfactory grade to continue M.Tech 

project part-1 in the next semester. His performance in the summer semester will be 

evaluated by his supervisor. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

36 



26 RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR PH. D. /M. TECH.-PH. D. 

DUAL DEGREE PROGRAM 

26.1 Thesis Supervisor(s) 

26.1.1 Selection of Ph.D. Candidates 

The selection should be based on merit and capability of the candidate to conduct research. 

There should at least be a faculty member available or likely to join in the areas of interest of 

the candidate at the time of selection. 

 

26.1.2 Appointment of Thesis Supervisor(s) 

● Ph. D. students shall be admitted in the department and no supervisor shall be 

assigned at the time of selection.  
● Allotment of students to supervisor(s) will be made based on the preferences of the 

students and supervisor(s). 
● For both Ph. D. and M. Tech. - Ph. D. Dual degree supervisor(s) and area identification 

must be completed by the end of the first semester 
● The Convener, DRC (Department Research Committee)/Coordinator (Interdisciplinary 

Research Program) would advise until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor(s).  
● There shall not be more than two supervisors, in general, for a student. Additional 

supervisor can be allowed with the approval of Chairman, Senate. 
● A supervisor from outside the institute, ​before the qualifier​, may be appointed on the 

request of student/supervisor(s) with the recommendation of the DRC/IRC and the Dean 

(Academics) and approval of the Chairman, Senate.  
● The external supervisor will be requested to sign Intellectual Property Right (IPR) and 

Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) documents as a part of acceptance. From the financial 

point of view the Institute will have no obligation to the external supervisor. 
 

26.1.3 Caretaker Supervisor/Additional supervisor 

● Whenever the supervisor proceeds on short leave for a period up to one year, the 

DRC/IRC (Interdisciplinary Research Committee) shall appoint a caretaker supervisor in 

consultation with the supervisor and the student to take care of the administrative 

requirements. 
● Whenever the supervisor proceeds on long leave for a period more than a year, then an 

additional supervisor needs to be appointed on the suggestion of the supervisor. 
● The supervisor going on lien or sabbatical may continue supervising students and the 

supervisor can opt for either an additional supervisor or a caretaker supervisor.  
● The supervisor on his/her retirement or on resignation may continue as a supervisor and 

will have to opt for an additional supervisor provided the student has cleared qualifier 

before the supervisor’s retirement/resignation.  
 

26.1.4 ​Composition of ​Departmental ​Research Committee (DRC) 

The DRC will consist of coordinators of M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree and Ph.D. programs 

of the department, head of the Department and Senior Professor/Associate Professor proposed 

by the Head. The DRC will be Chaired by Professor/Associate Professor nominated by Head of 

the Department. The Chairman of the DRC will be a member of the Academic Committee. The 

DRC has to be approved by Dean (Academics). Ph.D. program coordinator will be the convenor 

of DRC and will be proposed by the head. The tenure for the DRC will be 2 years. 

 

 

 

37 



26.1.5 ​Composition of  Interdisciplinary Research Committee (IRC) 

The IRC will consist of all coordinators of IDRPs and Senior Professor/Associate Professor as the 

chairman of the IRC will be nominated by Dean (Academics). The chairman of IRC will be a 

member of AC. One of the IDRP co-ordinators would be convenor of the committee. The tenure 

for the IRC will be 2 years. The IRC will be approved by the Dean (Academics). 

 

26.2 Change of Research Supervisor 

Change of supervisor (s), under exceptional circumstances, shall be permitted by Dean 

(Academics) on the recommendation of the DRC/IRC after obtaining the consent of (i) the 

student (ii) the present supervisor (s) and (iii) the proposed supervisor(s). If required, 

realignment of student’s research program will happen under the supervision of the DRC/IRC. 

 

26.3 Student Research Committee (SRC)  

26.3.1 Composition of SRC  

● The SRC will normally consist of supervisor(s) and three other faculty members 

conversant with the field of research with at least one member external to the 

department (maybe outside the Institute also).  
● A Student Research Committee (SRC) for the candidate shall be proposed by the 

supervisor(s), recommended by the DRC/IRC and approved by Dean (Academics).  
● The SRC shall have one member identified as Chairman for administrative functions and 

the supervisor(s) will act as convener. Chairman, SRC is to be appointed by Dean 

(Academics). 
● The appointment of SRC should be completed by the end of the first semester. 
● Any subsequent changes in the composition of SRC shall be communicated through the 

DRC/IRC to Dean (Academics) for record.  
● Chairman and supervisor(s) shall be the internal examiners for the evaluation of the 

thesis. 
● The SRC is expected to monitor the progress of the candidate until the 

completion of the program. 
 

26.4 Annual Progress Monitoring Meeting (APM) 

The academic progress of all registered Ph.D. students will be reviewed once in a year by the 

SRC and peers in the institute. The review will be based upon (i) Annual Progress Report and (ii) 

A Poster Presentation open to all. SRC will award a Satisfactory/Non-Satisfactory grade based 

upon (i) and (ii). Two consecutive Non-satisfactory grades will lead to termination of 

registration.  

For implementational convenience, academic calendar must indicate two days in a year for 

conducting annual progress evaluation of research scholars. Following the groupings of students 

and scheduling guidelines are suggested  

1. For students joining in 1st semester of AY: During 1st July to 30th September of the 

year. 

2. For students joining in 2nd semester of AY: During 1st December to 28th February of the 

year.  

The first APM will be conducted after the successful completion of qualifier requirements. 

Each semester “Satisfactory” progress or “Unsatisfactory” progress will be reported by the 

supervisor(s) through the SRC for record.  

Any situation in exception to the above will be processed by the academic committee and 

approved by Dean (academics) 

 

 

38 



 

26.5​ ​Qualifier requirements of Ph.D. Student 

The following four components together will constitute qualifier (candidacy) requirements for a 

Ph. D. student and for a Ph. D. candidate to be eligible for the enhanced SRF fellowship. 

1. Completed course requirements with the minimum CGPA specified in Section 22.8.1  

2. Cleared comprehensive examination 

3. Successful presentation on state of the art of the chosen field of research  

4. Successful presentation and defense of Research proposal  

 

The Ph. D. students are normally expected to complete successfully the Qualifier requirements 

before the beginning of the fifth semester of his/her registration in the Ph. D. program and 

in any case ​not later than the beginning of the sixth semester after their registration in 

the Ph. D. program. Part-time candidates will need to complete the qualifier requirement before 

the beginning of the seventh semester. 

 

26.5.1 Comprehensive Examination of Ph. D. /M.Tech-Ph.D Student 

● The comprehensive examination must be designed to test the general capability of the 

student and the breadth of his/her knowledge in the discipline and areas related to the 

field of research.  
● The Comprehensive Examination shall be conducted by a Comprehensive Examination 

Committee of the Department/IDRP. 
● The Comprehensive Examination will consist of a written test with three papers. 
● Departments will offer at least 5 Papers for conducting a comprehensive examination. 

Each paper will have broad coverage of one essential sub-area of the department. The 

course content of these papers will be approved by the academic committee and the 

Senate. The syllabus of papers for the comprehensive examination will not be the same 

as courses offered by the department; it must be designed to test the breadth of the 

knowledge in that area. 
● The SRC will specify a set three papers as a comprehensive requirement for a particular 

student. These three papers may be selected from across the departments. 
● The comprehensive examination requirements shall be intimated to the Ph.D. student 

within ​two weeks​ of SRC formation.  
● All comprehensive examinations will be scheduled on two fixed days in a year. It can 

coincide with the annual progress evaluation day of doctoral candidates. Students may 

decide to appear for three papers on the same day or on different days.  
● A student can appear in the comprehensive examination before he/she has completed 

the course requirements and satisfied the minimum specified CGPA requirement. 
● If the performance of the Ph.D. student in a comprehensive examination paper in the 

first attempt is not satisfactory, he/she will be given one more opportunity to appear 

within six months of the first attempt. 
● For clearing of the comprehensive examination, a student must perform satisfactorily in 

all papers. 
 

Comprehensive Examination to be completed by the students: 

● Ph.D. : within 3 semesters 
● Direct Ph.D. and MTech - PhD  Dual Degree: within 5 semesters 

 

26.5.2 State of Art Seminar (SOTA) 

Every Ph.D. student is required to give a general seminar in the Department covering the State 

of Art of the area of research. The presentation must also include patent landscaping of the 

 

 

39 



area. The presentation will be evaluated by the SRC. A candidate must have a satisfactory 

grade in SOTA awarded by SRC for becoming eligible to present his research proposal.  

 

26.5.3 Research Proposal 

Research proposal (report + presentation) will be evaluated by SRC after successful completion 

of SOTA. The research proposal must include representative research work equivalent to 

research work worth 16 credits. SRC will allocate a letter grade based on the performance of the 

candidate. 

 

26.6. Candidacy for the Ph.D. Degree 

A student enrolled in the Ph.D. program is formally admitted to the candidacy for the Ph.D. 

degree after he/she has completed the qualifier requirements for the degree. Only such 

students who are admitted to the candidacy will be allowed to submit Ph.D. thesis. 

 

 

 

26.7 Relaxation in  M.Tech. -Ph.D. dual degree program 

● M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree students who have successfully completed all qualifier 

requirements, under exceptional conditions, as approved by SRC after 3 years can also 

convert into part-time/external Ph.D. student and exit with M.Tech degree if all 

conditions for part-time/external conversion are satisfied. 
● The renewal of their registration for every semester however, will be considered only if 

SRC finds their progress to be satisfactory and recommends the continuance of 

registration. 
 

 

26.8 Cancellation of Registration 

● The registration of a student whose progress is not found to be satisfactory by the SRC 

or who has not enrolled will be liable for cancellation. 
● The registration of a student who has not submitted his/her thesis before the end of the 

maximum permissible period specified in Section 21.5 will be liable for cancellation. 
 

 

26.9 Synopsis 

● Synopsis will consist of an open seminar and a comprehensive internal closed-door 

assessment of the research work, through a pre-synopsis report, by SRC. 
● The student can submit the synopsis only if the SRC is satisfied with the quality and 

quantity of the work for submission as a Ph.D. thesis. 
● Publications arising out of the thesis are to be submitted along with the pre-synopsis 

report. 
● Students should submit the synopsis and thesis within ​six months of the open seminar 

date. If required, an extension of ​three months may be permitted by Dean (Academics) 

on the recommendation of SRC. 
● If the synopsis and thesis are not submitted in the specified period, the student will be 

asked to present the synopsis again. 
● On satisfactory completion of the prescribed courses with minimum CGPA specified in 

4.6.1, the comprehensive examination, the SOTA, the research work and the synopsis, 

the student shall submit the requisite copies of the synopsis of his/her research work in 

the required format through the supervisor(s) and HoD to the Academic Section for 

consideration of the SRC. 

 

 

40 



● The student should have at least one paper either published or accepted for publication 

in a refereed journal/refereed conference (SRC members are required to certify the 

quality of journals/conference). 
 

26.10 Thesis submission and Evaluation  

The supervisor(s) shall propose a list of 10 examiners consisting of at least four Faculty 

Members from abroad and 4 Faculty Members from India, who have the expertise in the area in 

which the student undertook research. For selecting an examiner, the following guidelines 

should be followed 

● The examiners shall have at least 6 years of Post-Ph.D. experience; 
● No two proposed examiners shall be from the same organization; and 
● The examiners can be Faculty Members or Scientists, of standing and repute.  
● Chairman, Senate may ask for additional names for examiners​. 
● The Chairman, Senate, shall select ​minimum two examiners from the proposed list, of 

which at least one should be an examiner from outside India. The consent of these 

examiners shall be taken before sending the Thesis to them. ​In addition, SRC and 

Supervisor(s) shall be the examiners of the Thesis. 
● The Viva Voce will be conducted in the presence of SRC, supervisor(s) and the 

external examiner.  
● One of the external examiners shall attend the Thesis Defense. 
● The examiners shall submit a written report on the thesis within a period of two months 

from the date of receipt of the Thesis. 
● If both examiners declare the Thesis as acceptable for award of Ph.D. degree, the Dean 

(Academics) shall request the Supervisor(s) to hold the Thesis Defense by the student.  
● If any of the examiners reject the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D. degree, the Dean 

(Academics) shall report the matter to the Chairman, Senate, for further consideration. 

The Chairman, Senate, will refer the Thesis to a third examiner under special 

circumstances; else the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the Ph.D. 

program. 
● If both examiners reject the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D. degree, no degree shall be 

awarded by the Institute, and the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the 

Ph.D. program.  
● If an examiner suggests a revision of the Thesis, the student shall resubmit the Thesis 

after the revision within a prescribed time period of ​6 months in ​consultation with the 

Supervisor(s).  
● When both examiners recommend the Thesis as accepted for the student to defend the 

Thesis, or after the resubmission of the Thesis after incorporating the 

suggestions/corrections given by the examiners, the student shall publicly present the 

Thesis and defend the contention of the Thesis. 
● The committee consisting of Chairman SRC, Supervisor(s), the Examiner from within 

India and other Faculty Members (quorum would be Chairman, SRC, Supervisor(s) and 

an external examiner), who participated in the Comprehensive Examination of the 

student, shall evaluate the Thesis Defense of the Ph.D. student also. On their 

recommendation, Dean (Academics) shall recommend to Senate, to consider the award 

of Ph.D. degree to the student. 
 

 

27. GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS 

A student is deemed to have completed the requirements for graduation if she/he has met the 

requirements laid down in Clauses 27.1 to 27.4 below. 

 

 

 

41 



27.1 Minimum Residential Requirement  

Table 27.1​ Minimum residential requirement  

S.No. Program  Qualifications at the time of joining the Minimum Duration 

Program (in semesters) of 

Residence  

1. M.Sc.  All qualifying degrees 4 

2. M.Sc.-M.Tech. All qualifying degrees 7 

Dual Degree 

3. M.Tech. Programs 

 Full-time All qualifying degrees 3 

Regular 

/Sponsored 

 Part-time All qualifying degrees 0 

 Executive All qualifying degrees 1 

4. Ph. D. Programs 

 Full-time Regular 

 Engineering M.Tech., M.E. or M.Sc. (Engineering) in an 2  

discipline  Engineering discipline 

M.Sc. degree  in a Science discipline 5  

B.Tech., B.E. or B.Sc. (Engineering)  in an 5 

Engineering discipline 

 Science, M.Sc., M.A. and M.Phil. degree in a Science, 2 

Humanities or Humanities or Social Science discipline 

Social Science 

discipline  

 Part-time All qualifying degrees 0 

 External All qualifying degrees 1 

 

27.2 Academic  

The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she/he has earned 

the minimum credits as per Section 22.3 for M. Sc., Section 22.4 for M. Tech., Section 22.5 for 

M. Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree, Section 22.6 for M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree and Section 22.7 for 

Ph.D., while meeting the minimum CGPA requirements as mentioned in Section 22.09. 

 

 

 

27.3 No Dues Clearance 

Degree will be awarded after obtaining No Dues Clearance from all concerned sections as 

deemed necessary by Dean (Academics) 

 

27.4 No case of Disciplinary Action  

The student shall not be considered to have completed the Academic Requirements if there is 

any case of indiscipline pending against her/him.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

42 



27.5 Award of Degrees  

27.5.1 Provisional Certificate 

A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 27.1 to 27.4, can 

be provided with a provisional certificate by the office of Dean (Academics) on the approval of 

Chairman, Senate. 

 

27.5.2 Degree Certificate 

A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 27.1 to 27.4, is 

recommended by the Senate to the Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate 

degree in the ensuing convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the BOG accords its 

approval.  

 

 

28. AMENDMENTS 

Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the 

right to modify/amend, without notice, Rules and Regulations of the Postgraduate programmes 

at IIT-Jodhpur. 

 

 

 

 

 

43







Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

 

   

 

 

 

 

PG Course Booklet 

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

July 2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

M.Tech  & M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree  

 in  

Data and Computational Science 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
(1) Introduction 

Data Science is the art of generating insight, knowledge and predictions by processing of data 
gathered about a system or a process. Computational Science is the art of developing validated 
(simulation) models in order to gain a better understanding of a phenomenon (system’s or 
processes). Computational sciences focus on development of causal models using latent patterns in 
the observed data, rather than only extracting patterns or knowledge from data by statistical 
methods.  
 
(2) Objective of the Programme 

To produce  professionals with deep knowledge and innovative analytical and computational 
research skills to handle problems in a variety of domains including governance, finance, security, 
transportation, healthcare, energy management, agriculture, population studies, weather 
prediction, economics, social sciences, predictive maintenance, structural health monitoring, smart 
manufacturing and computational structural biology. 
 
(3) Expected Graduate Attributes (M.Tech.) 

1. Skill set to clean, process, analyze, manage and handle security and privacy aspects of 
structured and unstructured data. 

2. Ability to identify, design and apply appropriate pattern recognition and data mining 
methods for generating relevant insight from data. 

3. Knowledge and capability to develop and apply machine learning techniques for data driven 
modelling. 

4. Ability to develop models and simulation schemes based upon domain knowledge in chosen 
domains and possible combination with data driven models. 

5. Capability to follow uniquely interdisciplinary approach for solving problems, using 
knowledge of mathematics, statistics, computing and one or more selected domains among  
physics, chemistry, biology and engineering sciences. 

6. Skill to use and design appropriate visualization techniques for representation and 
presentation of insights and solutions.  

7. Ability to innovate and contribute towards next generation data driven technology 
development.  

8. High quality technical communication skills. 
9. Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics.  
10. Ability to plan and manage technical projects. 

 
(4) Learning outcome: 

1. Strong Understanding of fundamentals of Data Mining, Machine Learning,  Modelling & 
Simulation, Optimization and Numerical Techniques. 

2. Basic understanding of Cryptographic and Blockchain Techniques. 
3. Knowledge about basics and use of visual analytics. 
4. Skill set to develop applications using Big Data.  
5. Advanced analytical and data driven modelling and simulation skills to address technological 

challenges in one or more specialized knowledge  domains like physics, chemistry, biology 
and engineering sciences. 

6. Demonstrate skills to communicate scientific ideas and/or application systems.  
7. Acquire project management skills. 

 
 

 

 



(5) Program Structure: 

Cat. Course Course Title L-T-P Credits Cat. Course Course Title L-T-P Credits 
Number Number 

Semester 1 Semester 2 
C MAL7XX0 Introduction to 1-0-0-0 1 C MAL7XX0 Numerical 1-0-0-0 1 

Data Science Methods for PDE 
C CSL7XX0 Machine 3-0-0-0 3 C CSL8XX0 Machine Learning 3-0-0-0 3 

Learning 1 2 
C MAL7XX0 Mathematics for 3-0-0-0 3 C CSL7XX2 Software and 1-0-0-0 1 

Data Science Data 
Architecture* 

C MAL7XX0 Statistics 2 2-0-0-0 2 C CSL7XX0 Security and its 3-0-0-0 3 
Application 

C MAL7XX0 Introduction to 1-0-0-0 1 C MAP7XX0 Data Analytics 0-0-2-0 1 
Modeling Lab 

E xxxxx PE1 3-0-0-0 3 E Xxxxx PE2 3-0-0-0 3 
C CSP7XX0 Data structures 0-0-2-0 1 E Xxxxx PE3 3-0-0-0 3 

and practices 
NG xxxxx Technical 1-0-0-0 1 NG xxxxx Innovation andIP 1-0-0-0 1 

Communication  Management  
 

Total 15 Total 16 
Semester 3 Semester 4 

E xxxxx PE4 3-0-0-0 3 E Xxxxx OE2 3-0-0-0 3 
E xxxxx PE5 3-0-0-0 3      
E xxxxx OE1 3-0-0-0 3      
P MA6xx   Project 0-0-0-5 5 P MA6xx   Project 0-0-0- 11 

11 
NG xxxxx System 1-0-0-0 1 NG xxxxx Professional Ethics 1-0-0- 1 

Engineering and  0 
Project 
Management 

Total 15 Total 15 
Grand Total 61 

*A fractal from the course. 

 

 Credit Distribution 
S.No. Category Course  Total Total 

Category Title Courses Credits 
1 C Compulsory  9 18 
2 C Labs 2 02 
3 PE Program Electives 5 15 
4 OE Open Electives 2 6 
5 P Project 1 16 

Total (without non-graded courses)  57 
 
  



(6) Topic Cloud 

Compulsory Topics: 

(a) Data pre-processing (including redundancy removal), Data storage, data 
representation, data handling, data query, data cleaning. 

(b) Relational data bases, graph databases, NoSQL (columnar DB), unstructured data, 
Map reduced techniques and Indexing. 

(c) Distributions, test of hypothesis, stochastic process, queuing process, sampling 
techniques, Probabilistic models, Mixture models, Latent Models, prediction models, 
Association Analysis, Correlation analysis, Evaluation and Validation, performance 
analysis/metrics 

(d) Vector and matrix algebra, Decompositions, SVD, pseudo inverse, rank approximation 
(e) Linear and Non-linear Programming. 
(f) Classification, regression, prediction, clustering, anomaly detection, feature 

engineering, supervised/ unsupervised Learning, Fundamental of SVM, Kernel 
techniques, States space machine, Markov decision process, ANN, Deep learning and 
its implementation, Deep learning application lab (GPU environment, Python 
environment) , Higher level Machine learning, Transfer learning, online and 
incremental learning, reinforcement learning, explain-ability in Machine Learning, Bias 
variance trade-off, ensemble learning, Auto ML 

(g) Discrete models, continuous models, Hybrid models (both analytical and data driven 
models), assumptions, approximations, models validation, MCS 

(h) Numerical methods for PDEs 
(i) Cryptosystems (types) 

 

Elective Topics: 

Financial engineering, Computational finance, Computational Game Theory, Graph Theory, 
Dynamical Systems, Reliability Theory, Stochastic Processes, Representation of Finite Groups, 
Computational linguistics, Computational economics, Digital Humanities, Cultural informatics, 
Blockchain, security and privacy, AR/VR, Natural Language Processing and Text analytics, 
Visualization, Machine learning for big data, Human-machine interface, Computational 
modelling in materials design, Bioinformatics, Computational biology, Digital Image Analysis, 
Coding Theory, Robotics, Computational electro magnetism, Computational optics, Quantum 
Information System, Quantum Cryptography, Quantum Computing, Computational Physics, 
Computational material science, Computational chemistry, adaptive numerical methods, 
multi-grid methods, parallel methods, GPU computation. 

 

  



 

(7) List of Program Electives 

(a) Electives from sister Departments: 

S.No. Course Title S.No. Course Title 
Department of Mathematics Department of Electrical Engineering 

1 Financial Engineering 19 Digital Image Processing and 
Applications 

2 Computational Game Theory 20 Digital Video Processing 
3 Advanced topics in computational PDE 21 Coding Theory 

22 Compressive Sensing 
4 Dynamical Systems 23 Machine Learning for Communication 
5 Reliability Theory 24 Compressive Sensing 
6 Stochastic Processes 25 Data Compression 
7 Representation of Finite Groups Department of Mechanical Engineering 
8 Shared Computational Economics 26 Robotics 

Department of Humanities and Social 27 Probabilistic Methods in Engineering 
Sciences Department of Physics 

9 Cultural informatics 28 Computational Physics 
Department of Computer Science and 29 Computational material science 
Engineering Department of Chemistry 

10 Computational linguistics 30 Computational Chemistry 
11 Introduction to Virtual and Augmented Department of Metallurgical and Materials 

Reality Engineering 
12 Natural Language Processing 31 Computational Materials Engineering 
13 Visualization/Data Visualization Department of Biosciences and 
14 Artificial Intelligence 1 bioengineering 
15 Artificial Intelligence 2 32 Omics Technologies 
16 Human Machine Interface 33 Algorithm development 
17 Graph Theory and its Applications 34 Computational modeling in material 
17 Bio-image Computing design 
18 Computer Vision 35 Applications in Multi Omics data, 

Imaging, Sensors 
 

(b) Electives from IDRPs: 

Digital Humanities 
1 Introduction to Digital Humanities 

Quantum Computing 
2 Introduction to Quantum Information 
3 Quantum Computing 
4 Facets of Quantum Information 
5 Quantum Cryptography and Coding 

 

(c) Specialized electives: 

1 Selected Topics in Data and Computational Science - I (1-0-0-0) 
2 Selected Topics in Data and Computational Science - II (2-0-0-0) 
3 Selected Topics in Data and Computational Science - III (3-0-0-0) 

 

  



(8) Content of compulsory courses: 
 

Title Introduction of Data Science Number MAL7XX0 

Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–0-0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  

1. Introduce the basics of data science and its underlying concepts.  
2. Introduce data processing, manipulation and cleaning techniques. 

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Acquire familiarity with the basic concepts of data science. 
2. Distinguish between different kinds of data and data governance. 
3. Understand the preparation and processing of the data. 

 
Contents  
[14 Lectures] Data preparation, Data pre-processing, Data Cleaning, Data Integration, Data 
Transformation, Data Reduction, Redundancy Removal, Data storage, Data Handling, Querying 
Data, Data Representation and Exploration, Big Data. 
 
Text Books  

1. Kotu, V. and Deshpande, B. (2018) Data Science: Concepts and Practice, Morgan 
Kaufmann. 

2. Saltz, J.S. and Stanton, J.M. (2017) An Introduction to Data Science, SAGE Publications. 
3. Kelleher, J.D., and Tierney, B. (2018) Data Science, MIT Press. 

 
Reference Books  

1. Moreira, J., Carvalho, A. and Horvath, T. (2018) A General Introduction to Data Analytics, 
John Wiley & Sons. 

2. Mayer-Schonberger, V. and Cukier, K., (2013) Big data: The essential guide to work, life 
and learning in the age of insight, John Murray Publications. 

 
Online course Material  
Not Available 
 
 

 

  



 
Title Mathematics for Data Science Number MAL7XX0 

Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–0-0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  

1. Provide an understanding statistical concepts for data scientist. 
2. Train the student to do Matrix Computations for implementing various numerical 

linear algebra algorithms. 
3. Train student in the domain of linear and non-linear programming. 

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Derive distributional results needed for the statistical hypothesis testing and perform 
the hypothesis testing for the parameters of the normal population. 

2. Understand the numerical linear algebraic methods and their usage for data analysis. 
3. Apply programming concepts for further applications in different areas of interest. 

 
Contents:  

MAL7XX1: Statistical Techniques [1-0-0-0] 

Probability Models and Sampling  Techniques[3 Lectures]: Normal, Chi-Square and t 
distributions, Basic concepts of random sampling, sampling from normal distribution, 
properties of sample mean and sample variance. 

Tests of Hypotheses[5 Lectures]: Basic concepts of statistical hypotheses testing-simple and 
composite hypotheses, critical regions, Type-I and Type-II errors, size and power of a test, 
Neyman Pearson lemma, tests for one-sample and two-sample problems from normal 
populations. 

Stochastic Processes[6 Lectures]: Definition and classification of general stochastic 
processes; Markov Chains: definition, transition probability matrices, classification of states, 
limiting properties; Poisson process, Birth and death processes, exponential queuing model. 

 

MAL7XX2: Matrix Computations [1-0-0-0] 

Matrix Algebra [3 Lectures]:Matrix operations and type of matrices, Rank of Matrix,  
Eigenvalues, Eigenvectors and Diagonalizable matrices, Vector Norms, Matrix Norms. 

Decompositions [9 Lectures]:Spectral decomposition, Schur Decomposition, QR 
Factorization, Singular value decomposition (SVD), Polar Decomposition, Pseudo Inverse. 

Approximations [2 Lectures]: Least square approximations, Low-Rank Approximation. 

 
MAL7XX3: Optimization [1-0-0-0] 

Linear Programming Problem[4 Lectures]: Linear combination of vectors, Convex set, 
Convex hull, Linear programming problem, feasible solution, basic feasible solution, 
graphical solution, Simplex method, Charne’s M method. 

Duality and IPP[6 Lectures]: Dual of an LPP, Integer Programming, Gomory’s cut-constraint 
method.  

Nonlinear Programming[4 Lectures]: First and second order conditions, Constrained 
optimization - Lagrange Multipliers, Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions. 

 
Text Books  

     (Fractal 1) 

1. Casella, G. and Berger, R. (2002), Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning. 
2. Ross, S.M. (1996), Stochastic Processes, Wiley. 



 

     (Fractal 2) 

3. Mayer, C.D. (2000) Matrix Analysis and Applied Linear Algebra, SIAM. 
4. Strang, G., (2006), Linear Algebra and its Applications. 
5. Elden, L. (2007) Matrix Methods in Data Mining and Pattern Recognition, SIAM. 

 

     (Fractal 3) 

6. Luenberger, D. G., Linear and Nonlinear Programming, Yinyu Ye, Third  Edition, 
Springer, 2008 

7. Kambo, N. S., Mathematical Programming Techniques,  Second Edition, Affiliated East 
West Press, 2005 

 
Reference Books  

     (Fractal 1) 

1. Rohatgi, V.K. and Saleh, A.K.M.E. (2018). An Introduction to Probability and 
Statistics, Wiley.  

2. Ross, S.M. (2010). An Introduction to Probability Models, Elsevier. 
3. Hoel, P.G., Port, S.C. and Stone, C.J. (1972). Introduction to Stochastic Processes, 

Houghton Mifflin Company. 
 
(Fractal 2) 

4. M    Goloub, G.H. and Charles, F.V.L. (2013) Matrix Computations, JHU Press. 
5. Lancaster, P. and Tismenetsky, M. (1985) The Theory of Matrices: With Applications, 

Academic Press. 
 
(Fractal 3) 

6. Bazaraa, M. S., Sherali, H.D., and Shetty, C. M., Nonlinear Programming: Theory and 
Algorithms, Third Edition, Wiley publications, 2006 

7. Darst, R, Introduction to Linear Programming: Applications and Extensions, Dekker 
Publications, 1991 
 

 
Online course Material  

(Fractal 2) 

1. Agrawal, P.N., Numerical Linear Algebra, NPTEL course material,  Department of 
Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology 
Roorkee,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107106/ 

(Fractal 3) 

2. Goswami A., Chakraborty D., Optimization, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Kharaggpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105039/ 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Title Advanced Statistical Techniques Number MAL7XX0 



Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 2–0–0-0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  

1. Provide an understanding of the statistical concepts and their real-life applications. 
 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Estimate the parameters of the underlying population; 
2. Gain the basic knowledge of mixture models, latent models, association, correlation and 

regression analysis. 
 

Contents: 
 
Estimation [4 Lectures]: Point estimation-maximum likelihood estimator, methods of evaluating 
estimators; Interval estimation- Methods of finding confidence intervals. 
 
Mixture Models and Latent Models [3 Lectures]: Basic ideas, finite mixtures, continuous mixtures, 
conditional mixing distributions; Latent models. 
 
Association and Correlation Analysis [7 lectures]: Categorical data, consistency of data, 
independence and association of attributes; Measures of association – Pearson’s and Yule’s 
measures, Goodman-Kruskal’s γ, Odds Ratio; Fitting of logit model through least squares, 
Properties of product moment correlation coefficient, Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient. 
 
Regression Analysis [14 lectures]:Model building, data collection, uses of regression; Simple linear 
regression model - Least-Squares estimation of the parameters, hypothesis testing on the slop and 
the intercept, interval estimation, prediction of new observations, coefficient of determination; 
Multiple linear regression model - estimation of the model parameters, hypothesis testing, 
confidence intervals, prediction of new observations; Model adequacy checking-residual analysis; 
Validation techniques. 
 
 
Text Books  

1. Casella, G. and Berger, R. (2002). Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning. 
2. Marshall, A.W. and Olkin, I. (2007). Life Distributions: Structure of Nonparametric, 

Semiparametric and Parametric families, Springer. 
3. Gun, A.M., Gupta, M.K. and Dasgupta, B. (1998): Fundamentals of Statistics (V-1), World 

Press. 
4. Montgomery, D.C., Peck, E.A. and Vining, G.G. (2012). Introduction to Linear Regression 

Analysis, Wiley. 
 

Reference Books  
1. Rohatgi, V.K. and Saleh, A.K.M.E. (2018). An Introduction to Probability and Statistics, 

Wiley. 
2. Draper, N.R. and Smith, H. (1998). Applied Regression Analysis, Wiley. 
3. Ross, S. (2012). Simulation, Academic Press 

 

Online course Material  
1. Panchenko, D., Statistics for Applications, Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT Open 

Courseware, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-443-statistics-for-applications-
fall-2006/#. 

 
 
  



 
Title Introduction to Modeling  Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  

The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce various modeling techniques 
2. Explain how to analyses mathematical models 

 
Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Model a given scenario using appropriate mathematical techniques 
2. Analyze and draw conclusions about the process/system under consideration 

 
Contents  
 

Principles of mathematical modeling [4 lectures]: Assumptions, approximations, abstraction, scale, 
conservation and balance principles, dimensional homogeneity and consistency, model validation  
 
Modeling Methods [10 lectures]: Continuous models, discrete models, models of hybrid systems, 
use of differential equations, variational principles, Data driven models. 
 
Textbooks  

1. Gershenfeld, N. (1999) The Nature of mathematical modelling, Cambridge University Press. 
2. Haberman, R. (1998) Mathematical models, SIAM. 

 
Reference Books  

1. Dym, C.L. (2004) Principles of mathematical modeling, Academic Press. 
2. Boccara, N. (2010) Modeling complex systems, Springer. 

  
Online Course Material  
Not available 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  



Title Numerical Methods for PDE Number MAL8XX1 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–0-0 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/Ph.D.(MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will  

1. Introduce finite difference schemes for numerical solutions of partial differential equations. 
2. Carry out numerical analysis of various finite difference schemes.  

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Apply finite difference schemes for numerical solution of partial differential equations. 
2. Undertake out error analysis and stability analysis of finite difference schemes 

 
 
Contents  
[8 Lectures] Characterization of PDEs, Finite difference methods for elliptic, parabolic and 
hyperbolic problems. 
 
[6 Lectures]Stability, consistency and convergence theory, dissipation and dispersion, error 
estimates. 
 
Text books  

1. Quarteroni, A. and Valli, A. , Numerical Approximation of Partial Differential Equations, 
Springer, 1997 

2. Morton, K. W.  and Mayers, D. F. , Numerical solution of partial differential equations, CUP, 
2005 

 
Reference Books  

1. Thomas, J. W. , Numerical partial differential equations: Finite difference methods, Springer, 
1995 

2. Trefethen, L. N. and David Bau III, Numerical Linear Algebra, SIAM, 1997 
 
Online Course Material  

1. Nayak, A. K. , Numerical methods: Finite Difference Approach, NPTEL  Course Material, 
Department of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107107/ 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  



 
Title Data Analytics Lab Number MAP7XX0 

Department Mathematical L-T-P-D [C] 0–0–2-D [1] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will  

1. Introduce the basics of R software and then train to write scripts, create a work 
environment, and data handling and data visualization.  

2. Enable students to be able to analyse the data using R. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understand R language fundamentals and basic syntax. 
2. Comprehend What R is and how it’s used to perform data analysis. 
3. Create their own R code for visualizations of data. 

 
Contents  
Basic calculations with R, Descriptive statistics [3 Labs]: Introduction to R Software, Basics  and 
calculations with Data Vectors, Built-in-commands and Missing Data Handling, Operations with 
Matrices,  Variables and Types of Data,  Absolute, relative frequency and frequency distribution, 
Graphs and plots. 
 
Central tendency of data and Variation in data [4 Labs]:Arithmetic Mean, Median, Quantiles, Mode, 
Geometric Mean and Harmonic Mean, Range, Interquartile Range and Quartile Deviation, Absolute 
Deviation and Absolute Mean Deviation, Mean Squared Error, Variance and Standard Deviation, 
Coefficient of Variation and Boxplots. 
 
Moments, Association of Variables, Fitting of Linear Models [7 Labs]:Central Moments, Absolute 
Moments and Computation of Moments, Skewness and Kurtosis, Univariate and Bivariate Scatter 
Plots, Quantile in 3D plots, Correlation Coefficient, Rank Correlation Coefficient, Measure of 
Association for Discrete and Counting Variables, Least Squares Method. 
 
Text Books  

1. Wickham, H. and Grolemund, G. (2016) R for Data Science: Import, Tidy, Transform, 
Visualize, and Model Data, 'O'Reilly Media, Inc. 

2. Toomey, D. (2014) R for Data Science, Packt Publishing Ltd. 
3. Healy, K. (2018) Data Visualization: A Practical Introduction, Princeton University Press. 

 
Reference Books  

1. Knell, R.J. (2014) Introductory R: A Beginner’s Guide to Data Visualisation,  
2. Stinerock, R. (2018) Statistics with R: A Beginner's Guide, SAGE publication. 

 
Online Course Material  

1. Shalab, Descriptive Statistics with R Software, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics and Statistics, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111104120/ 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(9) Content of Elective courses: 



 
Course Title Dynamical Systems Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. To introduce the concept of linear and nonlinear dynamical systems. 
2. To learn the basic concepts in dynamical systems, like, evolution of system, fixed points, 

periodic points, attractors, bifurcation process and stability of the systems. 
3. To understand the nonlinearity in nature and study of the nonlinear models in engineering 

and its dynamics. 
4. Use Matlab and simulink for solving dissipative dynamical systems, which are relevant for 

engineering models.  
 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Construction of phase portraits of nonlinear system and understanding of fundamental 
difference between linear and nonlinear systems. 

2. Identification of attractors, like, fixed points, periodic attractors, Cantor sets, Chaotic attractor 
and in the continuous case, limits cycles.  

3. Understanding the different bifurcations, like, saddle node, period doubling etc. 
 
Contents  
Linear and Nonlinear Dynamical Systems [Lectures 12]: History of Dynamics, The importance of 
being Nonlinear, A Dynamical view of the world, Examples of dynamical systems, Uncoupled 
Linear systems, Diagonalization, Exponential of operators, Linear systems in R^2 and Stability 
theory, Nonhomogeneous Linear systems, Nonlinear differential equations, Vector field of 
nonlinear systems, Phase portrait, Limit cycles and their stability. 
 
One-dimensional Discrete maps [Lectures 12]: Logistic maps, period doubling bifurcations, Flip 
and tangent bifurcations, Periodic windows, Intermittency transcritical, Lyapunov exponent, 
Universality and Experiments. 
 
Dynamics of Continuous and Discrete Systems: [Lectures 18]: Lorenz equations, Rossler 
Equation, Chua's circuit, Forced pendulum, Stable and Unstable manifolds, Basin boundary, 
Horseshoe maps, Boundary crisis, Interior crisis, Statistics of Chaotic attractor, Frequency 
spectra of orbits, Matrix times circle. 
 

Textbook 
1. Steaven, S., Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos: With Applications to Physics, Biology, 

Chemistry, and Engineering, 1st Ed., Levant Books, 2007 
2. Alligood, K., Sauer, T., and Yorke, J., Chaos:  An Introduction to Dynamical Systems, 

Second Edition, Springer, 2008. 
 

Reference Books 
1. Devaney, R.L., An Introduction to Chaotic Dynamical Systems, Addison Wesley, 2005. 
2. Holmgren, A.R., A First course in discrete dynamical systems, Springer. 

 
Online course Material  

1. Banerjee S., NPTEL Course on Chaos, Fractals and Dynamic Systems, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, IIT Kharagpurhttps://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105054/ 
 

 
 
 
  



 
Title Stochastic Processes Number MAL8XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite Probability and Linear Algebra   

 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 

1.  Provide background in the area of Random Processes. 
2. Provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for further 

applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Develop basic understanding of the Stochastic Process, Random Walk and Martingales. 
2.  Impart knowledge in Markov Chain, Birth and Death Process, Brownian Motion, Stochastic 

Calculus 
 
Contents  
[4 Lectures] Conditional probability and conditional expectation, properties of conditional 
expectation. 
 
[8 Lectures]Stochastic processes, stationarity, finite-dimensional distributions, stopping times, 
stopped sigma-fields and processes, right-continuous and canonical filtrations, adapted and 
previsible processes. 
 
[8 Lectures]Random walk; Gaussian distribution: for variables, vectors and processes, non-
degeneracy, stationarity, closeness under 2-mean convergence. 
 
[12 Lectures]Brownian motion, Gaussian construction, independence of increments, scaling and 
time inversion, Levy's martingale characterization, reflection principle, law of its maximum in an 
interval and first hitting time of positive levels, modulus of continuity, quadratic and total variation. 
Related processes: Geometric Brownian motion, Brownian bridge, Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process and 
martingales. 
 
[10 Lectures]Poisson distribution, approximation, rate, construction, independence of increments, 
memoryless property of the Exponential law, the dual process of independent Exponential inter-
arrivals, the order statistics of independent uniform samples. 
 
Textbook  

1. Ross, S. M. (2018), Stochastic Processes, Wiley 
 

Reference Books  
1. Ross, S. M. (2005), Introduction to Probability Models, Elsevier 
2. Shreve, S. E. (2008), Stochastic Calculus for Finance II, Springer 

 

Online course Material  
1. Wu, H., Introduction to Stochastic Processes, Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT 

Open Courseware, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-445-introduction-to-
stochastic-processes-spring-2015/. 

 
 
 
  



 
Title Computational Game Theory Number MAL8XX0 

Department Mathematics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basics of Optimization Theory   
 
Objectives  
1. Provide background in the area of computational game theory. 
2. Provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for further 

applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding of fundamentals like Nash equilibrium, dominant strategies and their 

applications.  
2. Basic understanding of the Co-operative games, iterated games and mixed strategies. 
3. Knowledge of non-co-operative games, Zermelo’s algorithm and their applications.  
 
Contents  
[12 lectures]: Von Neumann and Morgenstern utility functions, expected utility and expected 
utility maximization, Paradoxes of expected utility maximization, Compact representations for 
preference relations, Dichotomous preferences and goals. Representations for specifying goals,  
Strategic Form Non-Cooperative Games, Basic model and solution concepts, pure strategy Nash 
equilibrium, dominant strategies, notable games, coordination games and focal points, complexity 
of pure strategy Nash equilibrium. 
 
[14 Lectures]: Mixed strategies: Nash’s theorem and Nash equilibrium, Computing mixed strategy 
Nash equilibria, Lemke-Howson algorithm, Zero sum games, Minimax Theorem, Compact 
representations for strategic form games, Boolean games, congestion games, Iterated Games: 
Finitely repeated games and backward induction, Infinitely repeated games, measuring utility over 
infinite plays modelling strategies as finite state machines with output (Moore machines); The Folk 
theorems, Iterated Boolean games, Axelrod’s tournament, the Hawk-Dove game, evolutionary 
game theory, evolutionarily stable strategies. 
 
[16 lectures]: Extensive Form Non-Cooperative Games: Zermelo’s algorithm and backward 
induction, subgame perfect equilibrium, Zermelo’s theorem, Compact representations for 
extensive form games, PEEK games and EXPTIME-completeness results, the Game Description 
Language (GDL), Imperfect information games, PEEK games with incomplete information, 
Cooperative Games: Transferable utility (TU) characteristic function games, basic model, stability 
& fairness solution concepts, cost of stability, Shapley value, Banzhaf index, induced subgraph 
representation, marginal contribution nets, Simple TU games, swap and trade robustness, 
weighted voting games, vector weighted voting games, network flow games, NTU games and their 
representations  
 
Textbooks 
1. G. Chalkiadakis, E. Elkind, and M Wooldridge, Computational Aspects of Cooperative Game 

Theory, Morgan-Claypool, 2011.  
2.  Machler, E. Solan, S. Zamir, Game Theory, Cambridge U.P., 2013.   
3. M. J. Osborne, An Introduction to Game Theory, Oxford U.P., 2004. 
 
Reference Books  
1. R. D. Luce and H. Raiffa, Games and Decisions, Wiley, 1958  
2.  M. J. Osborne and A. Rubinstein, A Course in Game Theory, 1994. 
 
Online course Material  
Not Available 
 
  



 
Title Advanced topics in Computational PDE Number MAL8XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite ODEs, PDEs and numerical methods   
 
Objectives  

The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce multi-grid methods, 
2. Introduce parallel computing methods, 
3. Explain use multi-grid methods and parallel computing methods. 

 
Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability  
1. to solve partial differential equation using multi-grid methods, 
2. to speed up computations using parallel numerical methods. 

 
Contents  
 

Multi-grid methods [20 lectures]: Review of classical finite difference schemes for numerical 
solution of partial differential equations, Fourier analysis for error propogation, influence of grid 
parameters, grid hierarchies, multi-grid cycles, convergence monitors, smoother, W-cycle and 
nested iteration, coarse-grid solver, multigrid as a preconditioner, Numerical implementations 
with Diffpack programming 
 
Parallel Computing [20 lectures]: Need for parallel computation, different hardware 
architectures, message-passing programming model, multicomputer model, OPEN MP, MPI, 
CUDA, parallel linear algebra operations, parallel algorithms for linear systems with special 
structures, parallel implementation of direct and iterative methods for solution of linear 
systems, parallelizing finite difference schemes (wave Equation, heat condunction equation)  
 
 
Textbooks  

1. Langtangen H. P. and Tveito, A. (Editors) (2003) Advanced topics in computational 
partial differential equations: Numerical methods and Diffpack programming, Springer 

2. Briggs, W. L., Henson, V. E., and McCormick, S. F. (2000) A multigrid tutorial, 2nd Ed., 
SIAM 

3. Grama, A., Gupta, A., Karypis, G., and Kumar, V. (2003) Introduction to parallel 
computing, 2nd Ed,  Pearson 

 
Reference Books  

1. Quarteroni, A. and Valli, A. (1997), Numerical approximations of partial differential 
equations, 2nd Edition, Springer 

2. Bertsekas, D. P. and Tsitsiklis, J. N. (1997) Parallel and distributed computation: 
Numerical methods, Prentice-Hall 

  
Online Course Material  

1. M. Ramakrishna, Introduction to computational fluid dynamics, NPTEL course material, 
Department of Aerospace Engineering Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/101106045/ 

2. Subodh Kumar, Parallel Computing,  NPTEL course material, Department of Computer 
Science and Engineering Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102114/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Title Financial Engineering Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 

1. Securities Pricing Securities, Risk Management Assessment, prediction and decision making, 
under uncertainty, regarding future events and their consequences 

2. Portfolio Optimization Balancing risk and return 
3. Modeling Pricing of derivatives and Itos calculus 

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Valuation of financial portfolio 
2. Pricing of financial derivatives (options and contracts) 
3. Understanding risk and return 

 

Contents  
 
[18 lectures]Introduction to financial markets and financial instruments, financial derivatives, risk 
and return, risky and risk free assets, interest rates, bonds, bonds pricing, spot and forward rates, 
investment portfolio, mean-variance analysis, capital asset pricing model, arbitrage pricing theory. 
 
[22 lectures]Discrete time models, stock and money market models, principle of no arbitrage, 
pricing of contracts (forward and future), options, put-call parity, option pricing, martingales, 
Binomial model, CRR model, Black-Scholes formula, Greeks, random walk, Brownian motion, 
stochastic process, Itos integral and Ito-Deoblins formula. 
 
Textbook  

1. M. Capinski and T. Zastawniak (2010). Mathematics for finance: an introduction to financial 
engineering, Springer.  

2. S.N. Neftci (2009). Principles of financial engineering. Academic Press/Elsevier. 
 
Reference Books  

1. J.C. Hull (2011). Options, futures and other derivatives. Pearson India. 
2. S.E. Shreve (2000). Stochastic calculus for finance I: The binomial asset pricing model, 

Springer 
 

Online Course Material 
Not Available 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  



Title Reliability Theory Number MAL8XX0 

Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA)  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Probability and Statistics   
 
Objectives  

1. To understand the basic concepts of statistical reliability theory and their various real-life 
applications. 

 
Learning Outcomes  

1. Understand the basic notion of systems, different reliability measures, different notions of 
ageings, different semiparametric models, shock models and dependence structures; 

2. Gain the ability to handle different issues in system reliability. 
 
Contents  
Basic Notion of Systems [6 lectures]: Structure function, coherent systems, k-out-of-n systems, 
dual structures, cut and path sets, modular decomposition. 
 
Reliability Measures [5 lectures]: Survival/Reliability functions, hazard rate function, reversed 
hazard rate function, residual lifetime, inactivity time, mean residual lifetime function, mean 
inactivity time, reliability bounds. 
 
Semiparametric Models [6 lectures]:Common life distributions, scale model, proportional hazard 
rate model, proportional reversed hazard rate model, proportional odds model, proportional mean 
residual lifetime model. 
 
Stochastic Ageings [8 lectures]: Notions of stochastic ageing, different ageing classes, ageing 
properties of common life distributions, closure properties of different ageing classes under 
formation of coherent structures, convolutions and mixtures. 
 
Shock Models and Dependence Structures [7 lectures]: Univariate and bivariate shock models, 
notions of bivariate and multivariate dependence structures. 
 
Issues in System Reliability [10 lectures]: Maintenance and replacement policies, availability of 
repairable systems, optimization of system reliability with redundancy. 
 
Text Books  

1. Barlow, R.E. and Proschan, F. (1975). Statistical Theory of Reliability and Life Testing. Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, New York. 

2. Lai, C.D. and Xie, M. (2006). Stochastic Ageing and Dependence for Reliability. Springer, 
New York. 

3. Marshall, A.W. and Olkin, I. (2007). Life Distributions. Springer, New York. 
 
Reference Books  

1. Barlow, R.E. and Proschan, F. (1965). Mathematical Theory of Reliability. Wiley, New York. 
2. Samaniego, F.J. (2007). System Signatures and their Applications in Engineering 

Reliability. Springer, New York. 
 
Online Course Material 
Not Available 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  



 
Title Representations of finite groups Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 

1. The goal of this course is to give an introduction to representation theory and to understand 
representations of symmetric groups. 

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Representation theory and characters of finite groups. 
2. Representation theory of Symmetric groups. 

 
Contents 
Group Action and Modules[6 Lectures]: Groups and Examples (Recall), Group action, Conjugacy 
Classes, Modules: Definition and Examples. 
 
Basic concepts of Representation Theory[10 Lectures]: Representations and basic          examples, 
FG-modules, Group algebra, Irreducible representations, complete reducibility and Maschke’s 
theorem, Schur’s lemma. 
 
Characters and Burnside’s pq Theorem[10 Lectures]: Character theory of representations, 
orthogonality relations, decomposition of the regular representation. Character Tables of some 
groups, Characters and Algebraic Integers, Burnside’s pq-theorem. 
 
Representation theory of symmetric groups[16 Lectures]: Tensor products, Restriction of a 
representation, induced representations, Frobenius reciprocity, Mackey’s irreducibility criterion, 
Representation theory of symmetric groups, Few applications of Representation Theory (if time 
permits). 
 

Text Books 
1. Benjamin Steinberg, Representation Theory of Finite Groups, Springer (Universitext), 

2012. 
2. Gordon James and Martin Liebeck, Representations and Characters of Groups, Cambridge 

University Press, 2001. 
 
Reference Books 

1. William Fulton and Joe Harris, Representation Theory: A First Course, Springer (Graduate 
Texts in Mathematics 129), 1991. 

2. Amritanshu Prasad, Representation Theory: A Combinatorial Viewpoint, Cambridge 
University Press, 2015. 

 
Online Course Material 
Not Available 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  



Title Computational Linguistics Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech./PhD Type Elective  
Prerequisite Basic Probability Theory   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 

1. Enable students to develop computational models for languages. 
2. Introduced linguistic structure of an unfamiliar language in terms of morphology, syntax, 

and orthography. 
3. Impart knowledge of linguistic descriptions of a language combined with some textual 

resource in the language. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Do an exhaustive search of resources in and about a language without many resources. 
2. Resolve technical, logistical, and ethical issues involved in constructing a keyboard layout 

for a language's morphology and orthography. 
3. Design and implement general approaches in rule-based machine translation. 

 
Contents  
 
Introduction[2 Lectures]: Definition of computational linguistics, Ambiguity and uncertainty in 
language, The Turing test. 
Regular Expressions[6 Lectures]: Chomsky hierarchy, regular languages, and their limitations, 
Finite-state automata, Practical regular expressions for finding and counting language phenomena, 
morphology, syntax and orthography. 
String Edit Distance[6 Lectures]: Key algorithmic tool: dynamic programming, optimal alignment of 
sequences, String edit operations, edit distance, spelling correction, and machine translation.  
Context Free Grammar[4 Lectures]: Constituency, CFG definition, use and limitations. Chomsky 
Normal Form, Top-down parsing, bottom-up parsing, Efficient CFG parsing with CYK, Earley parser.  
Language modelling[10 Lectures]: Definition of information and its measurement, noisy channel 
model, the language Shannon game, Entropy, cross-entropy and information gain for language 
phenomena, Probabilistic language modelling and its applications, estimating the probability of a 
word, and smoothing, Generative models of language and their application to building an 
automatically-trained email spam filter, and automatically determining the language. 
Part of Speech Tagging[4 Lectures]: The concept of parts-of-speech, examples and usage, the 
Penn Treebank and Brown Corpus, Collocations and Noun Phrase Parsing. 
Word Sense Disambiguation and Clustering[10 Lectures]: Homonomy, polysemy, different 
meanings, the power of context, Language neighbourhood as a vector, Agglomerative clustering, 
Clustering by expectation maximization, Using clustering to discover different word senses, Semi-
supervised document classification.  
 
Textbook  

1. Grishman, R. (1986) Computational Linguistics: An Introduction, Cambridge University 
Press. 

2. Rosner, M. and Johnson, R. (1992) Computational Linguistics and Formal Semantics, 
Cambridge University Press. 

3. Jurafsky, D. (2000) Speech & Language Processing, Pearson Education India. 
 
Reference Books  

1. Mitkov, R. (2004) The Oxford Handbook of Computational Linguistics, Oxford University 
Press. 

2. Manning, C.D. and Schütze, H. (1999) Foundations of Statistical Natural Language 
Processing, MIT Press. 

 
Online Course Material 
 
  



 
Title Computational Economics Number MAL8XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of Optimization techniques   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 

1. Enable students to understand computational economic models. 
2. Impart knowledge to design expressive marketplaces. 

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Do an exhaustive search of computational economic models. 
2. Analyse expressive marketplaces. 
3. Design and implement optimal market mechanisms. 

 

Contents  
[6 Lectures] Definition of computational economics, basic techniques from mathematics, Linear 
programming, (Mixed) integer linear programming, Computational problems, Algorithms, Runtime 
of algorithms, Easy and hard problems. 
 
[12 Lectures] Single-item auctions, Combinatorial auctions, Bidding languages, Winner 
determination problem, Reverse auctions and exchanges, Expressive financial securities, Barter 
exchanges/matching markets. 
 
[12 Lectures] Kidney exchange, Expressive negotiation over donations, Voting and social choice, 
Iterative mechanisms/preference elicitation.  
 
[12 Lectures] Risk neutrality and risk aversion, Expected utility theory, Incentive compatibility, 
Individual rationality, Revelation principle, Clarke mechanism, Groves mechanisms, Automated 
mechanism design and Proper scoring rules. 
 
Textbook  

1. Miranda, M.J. and Fackler, P.L. (2004) Applied Computational Economics and Finance, MIT 
Press. 

2. Afonso, O. and Vasconcelos, P.B. (2015) Computational Economics: A concise introduction, 
Routledge. 

 
Reference Books  

1. Stokey, N.L. (1989) Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics, Harvard University Press. 
2. Chen, S.-H., Kaboudan, M. and Du, Y.-R. (2018) The Oxford Handbook of Computational 

Economics and Finance, Oxford University Press. 
 
Online Course Material 
 
 
 
 
 
  



Title Computational Chemistry Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.(DCS) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 

1. Describe knowledge of modern techniques in computational methods applied in chemistry. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 

1. Use modern computational chemistry techniques to solve fundamental problems related to 
chemistry. 

 
Contents 
Basics: Fundamentals of quantum, classical, and statistical mechanics, mathematical techniques 
(10 lectures) 

Electronic structure: Variation theory, perturbation theory, electron spin, He atom, Pauli exclusion 
principle, Slater determinant (6 lectures)  

Electronic structure of diatomic molecules: Born Oppenheimer approximation, Atomic units, H2+ 
ion, H2 molecule, VB theory, MO theory (8 lectures)  

Wave function based theory: Hartree-Fock theory, Electron correlation, Self-consistent field wave 
function, Moller-Plesset theory, Coupled cluster formulation (10 lectures)  

Basics of Molecular Dynamics: Theoretical foundation, Boltzmann’s relation, harmonic oscillator and 
harmonic baths, Algorithms for equations of motions (7 lectures) 

 
Textbook 
1. Levine, I. N., (2000) Quantum Chemistry, Pearson education. 
2. Lowe, J. P., (1995) Elementary Quantum Chemistry, Academic Press. 

 
Reference Books 
1. Szabo, A. and Ostlund, N. S., (1996) Modern Quantum Chemistry, Dover. 
2. D. Frenkel and B. Smith, (2002), Understanding Molecular Dynamics Simulations,1st Edition, 

Academic Press  
 
Self learning Material 
1. K. Mangala Sunder, Introduction to Chemistry & Quantum Chemical Methods, NPTEL course 

material, Department of Chemistry, IIT Madras, http://nptel.iitm.ac.in 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 
	  

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 
 
 

Course Booklet  
 

for 

 
M.Tech. (AI)  

 
and  
 

Dual degree M.Tech. (AI) + PhD  
 

 
Programs  

 
offered by the 

 
 

Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
 
 
 
 
 
 

July 2019 
 
  

 



 
M.Tech in Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
Introduction: 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a branch of computer science that aims to create machines to act with higher 
levels of intelligence and emulate the human capabilities of sense, comprehend and act. The core problems of 
artificial intelligence include programming computers for certain traits such as Knowledge, Reasoning, 
Problem-solving, Perception, Learning and Planning. AI technology development and applications are 
evolving rapidly with major implications for economies and societies. As the demand for such applications 
increases, there is also an increasing need for building the future workforce for AI. For developing the AI 
ecosystem, this program will be executed in synergy with other M.Tech programs running in IIT Jodhpur, 
such as Sensors & IoT, Cyber-Physical Systems, and Advanced Manufacturing and Design. 
Objectives: 
This M.Tech in AI programme will offer students with deep knowledge of both fundamental AI technologies, 
as well as application-oriented AI. A student completing this program will be capable to undertake careers in 
industry as well as academia. He/She will have the option to explore a variety of domains including 
Manufacturing, Fintech, Healthcare, Agriculture/Food Processing, Education, Retail/Customer Engagement, 
Human and Robot interaction/intelligent automation, Smart City , Aid for Differently Abled/Accessibility 
Technology. 
Expected Graduate Attributes: 
After completing this programme, a student will be able to develop an ability to: 

1. Comprehend fundamental concepts and hands-on knowledge of the state-of-the-art AI methodologies.  
2. Design and Build real-world AI systems for complex planning, decision making and learning, solving 

application-specific problems, and to reason about them. 
3. Conceive, Design and Develop Intelligent multi-modal multi-sensory Man-Machine interfaces.  
4. Design, Develop and Deploy machine learning based applications using structured and unstructured 

data (e.g., speech, text, images/videos). 
5. Understand and Assess reliability, dependability and trust-worthiness of AI-based systems. 
6. Design and develop AI applications for resource constrained environments.  
7. Adhere to evolving ethics and privacy laws across various domains and territories. 
8. Plan and manage technical projects.  

Learning Outcome: 
1. Understand the fundamentals of Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Inference Engines, Speech, 

Vision, Natural Language Understanding, Robotics, and Human Computer Interaction. 
2. Unify the knowledge of human cognition, AI, Machine Learning and data engineering for  

designing systems.  
3. Demonstrate hands-on knowledge of state-of-the-art AI tools for real-world problem-solving. 
4. Ability to develop real-time and robust AI-based systems with specific software, hardware and data 

requirements.  
5. Build solutions to explore fully immersive computer-generated worlds (in VR), and overlay computer 

graphics onto our view of our immediate environment (AR) along with smart, cognitive functionality. 
6. Demonstrate advanced skills to comprehend and communicate effectively.  
7. Carry out projects using intelligent cognitive solutions provided by AI algorithms to get more insights 

in stakeholder management, risk modeling, intelligent resource scheduling and managing project 
constraints with intelligent use of data models. 

	   	  

	  
 



 
Course	  Structure	  for	  	  

M.Tech.	  (AI)	  Program	  and	  Dual	  degree	  M.Tech.	  (AI)	  +	  PhD	  
	  
	  
Cat	   Code	   Course	  Title	   L-­‐T-­‐P	  Cr	   	   Cat	   Code	   Course	  Title	   L-­‐T-­‐P	  Cr	  

I	  Semester	   	   II	  Semester	  
C	   MAL7xx Statistics	  I	  	   1-­‐0-­‐0	   3	   	   C	   CSL8xx0	   Artificial	  Intelligence	  II	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  

0	   Matrix	  Computation	  	   1-­‐0-­‐0	  
Optimization	   1-­‐0-­‐0	  

C	   CSL7xx0	   Artificial	  Intelligence	  I	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	   	   C	   CSL8xx0	   Machine	  Learning	  II	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  
C	   CSL7xx0	   Machine	  Learning	  I	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	   	   C	   CSL8xx0	   Real	  Time	  Autonomous	   2-­‐0-­‐0	  2	  

Systems	  
C	   CSP7xx0	   Data	  Structures	  and	   0-­‐0-­‐2	  1	   	   PE	   xxxxx	   Program	  Elective	  3	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  

Practices	  
PE	   xxxxx	   Program	  Elective	  1	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	   	   OE	   xxxxx	   Open	  Elective	  1	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  
PE	   xxxxx	   Program	  Elective	  2	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	   	   NG	   xxxxx	   Ethics	  and	  Professional	  Life	  	  1-­‐0-­‐0	   1	  
	   xxxxx	   Technical	   1-­‐0-­‐0	   1	   	   	   	   	   	   	  

Communication	  
Total	  Credits:	  17	  	   Total	  Credits:	  15	  

	  
*Maths	  Fractals:	  Linear	  Algebra,	  Probability	  and	  Random	  Processes,	  Optimization	  
	  
Cat	   Code	   Course	  Title	   L-­‐T-­‐P	   Cr	   	   Cat	   Code	   Course	  Title	   L-­‐T-­‐P	   Cr	  

III	  Semester	   	   IV	  Semester	  
P	   CSDxx0	  Major	  Project	  –	  Part	  1	   0-­‐0-­‐10	   5	   	   P	   CSDxx Major	  Project	  –	  Part	  2	   0-­‐0-­‐22	   11	  

0	  
PE	   xxxxx	   Program	  Elective	  4	   3-­‐0-­‐0	   3	   	   PE	   xxxxx	   Program	  Elective	  6	   3-­‐0-­‐0	   3	  
PE	   xxxxx	   Program	  Elective	  5	   3-­‐0-­‐0	   3	   	   NG	   xxxxx	   Intellectual	  Property	   1-­‐0-­‐0	   1	  
OE	   xxxxx	   Open	  Elective	  -­‐	  2	   3-­‐0-­‐0	   3	   	   	   	   	   	   	  
NG	   xxxxx	   System	  Engineering	   1-­‐0-­‐0	   1	   	   	   	   	   	   	  

and	  Project	  
Management	  

Total	  Credits:	  15	  	   Total	  Credits:	  15	  
	  

Credit	  Distribution	  
1	   Program	  Core	   18	  credits	  
2	   Program	  Electives	   18	  credits	  
3	   Open	  Electives	   6	  credits	  
4	   Project	   16	  credits	  
5	   Non-­‐graded	  	   4	  credits	  

Total	   62	  credits	  
	  
	   	  

	  
 



 
Program	  Electives	  for	  M.Tech.	  (AI)	  and	  	  

Dual	  Degree	  M.Tech.	  (AI)+Ph.D.	  Program	  
	  

Courses	  offered	  by	  Department	  of	  Computer	  Science	  and	  Engineering	  
• Advanced	  Computer	  Graphics	  
• Algorithms	  for	  Big	  Data	  
• AI	  for	  Finance	  
• Bio-­‐image	  computing	  
• Blockchain	  
• Computer	  Graphics	  
• Computer	  Vision	  
• Computational	  Optimization	  
• Computer	  Architecture	  
• Data	  Visualization	  
• Dependable	  AI	  
• Digital	  Image	  Analysis	  
• Edge	  and	  Fog	  Computing	  
• Embedded	  Systems	  
• GPU	  Programming	  
• Graph	  Theory	  and	  Applications	  
• Human	  Machine	  Interface	  
• Information	  Retrieval	  and	  Web	  Mining	  
• Introduction	  to	  Augmented	  Reality	  and	  Virtual	  Reality	  
• Machine	  Learning	  with	  Big	  Data	  
• Natural	  Language	  Processing	  
• Neuromorphic	  Computing	  and	  Design	  
• Ad	  hoc	  Wireless	  Networks	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Artificial	  Intelligence	  -­‐	  I	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Artificial	  Intelligence	  -­‐	  II	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Artificial	  Intelligence	  -­‐	  III	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Computer	  Science	  -­‐	  I	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Computer	  Science	  -­‐	  II	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Computer	  Science	  -­‐	  III	  
• Social	  Network	  Analysis	  
• Software	  and	  Data	  Engineering	  
• Security	  and	  its	  Applications	  
• Speech	  processing	  
• Stream	  Analytics	  
• Vehicular	  Ad-­‐hoc	  Networks	  (VANETs)	  

	  
Courses	  offered	  by	  Department	  of	  Electrical	  Engineering	  

• Adaptive	  Signal	  Processing	  
• Advanced	  Control	  System	  
• Advanced	  Digital	  Communication	  
• Advanced	  Signal	  Processing	  
• Analog	  and	  Interfacing	  Circuits	  

	  
 



 
• Antenna	  Engineering	  
• Applied	  Optimization	  for	  Wireless	  Communication	  
• Backhaul	  Networks	  for	  Wireless	  Systems	  
• Coding	  Theory	  
• Compressive	  Sensing	  	  
• Computational	  Imaging	  
• Cyber	  Physical	  System	  Modelling	  Laboratory	  
• Data	  Compression	  
• Digital	  image	  and	  Video	  Processing	  Lab	  
• Digital	  Image	  Processing	  and	  Applications	  
• Digital	  Signal	  Processing	  
• Digital	  Video	  Processing	  
• Digital	  VLSI	  	  Design	  
• Embedded	  System	  Design	  
• Embedded	  System	  Design	  Lab	  
• Flexible	  and	  Printed	  Electronics	  
• Free	  Space	  Optical	  Communications	  
• GNSS	  Signal	  Processing	  
• Image	  Sensor	  Design	  and	  Applications	  
• Introduction	  to	  Cyber-­‐Physical	  Systems	  
• Machine	  Learning	  for	  Communication	  
• Mathematical	  Modelling	  and	  Simulation	  
• Microfluidics	  Technology	  
• Microsystems	  Fabrication	  Technology	  
• Millimeter	  Wave	  Technology	  
• Multi-­‐rate	  Digital	  Signal	  Processing	  
• Nanosensors	  
• Network	  Information	  Theory	  
• Neuromorphic	  computing	  and	  design	  
• Optical	  Fiber	  Communications	  
• Optimal	  Filtering	  
• Physical	  Layer	  Security	  
• Principles	  of	  Data	  and	  System	  Security	  
• Real	  Time	  Communications	  
• Resource	  Constrained	  AI	  
• RF	  IC	  Design	  
• RF	  IC	  Design	  Lab	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Communication	  I	  	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Communication	  I	  	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Communication	  II	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Communication	  III	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Sensors	  &	  IoT	  I	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Sensors	  &	  IoT	  II	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Sensors	  &	  IoT	  III	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Signal	  Processing	  I	  	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Signal	  Processing	  II	  

	  
 



 
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Signal	  Processing	  III	  
• Sensors	  and	  IoT	  Lab	  
• Sensors	  and	  Measurement	  
• Smart	  Grid	  
• Speech	  and	  Audio	  Signal	  Processing	  
• Statistical	  Decision	  Theory	  
• Systems-­‐on-­‐Chips	  Design	  
• VLSI	  Design	  Lab	  
• Wavelets	  
• Wireless	  Communication	  
• Wireless	  Networks	  

	  
Courses	  offered	  by	  Department	  of	  Mechanical	  Engineering	  

• Robotics	  

	  
Courses	  offered	  by	  Department	  of	  Bioscience	  and	  Bioengineering	  

• Bioinformatics	  
• Computational	  Biology	  

	  
Courses	  offered	  by	  Department	  of	  Mathematics	  

• Financial	  Engineering	  
• Computational	  finance	  
• Computational	  Game	  Theory	  
• Advanced	  topics	  in	  computational	  PDE	  
• Dynamical	  Systems	  
• Stochastic	  Processes	  
• Representation	  of	  Finite	  Groups	  

	  
	  

Courses	  offered	  by	  Department	  of	  Physics	  
• Quantum	  Computing	  
• Quantum	  Information	  Processing	  
• Quantum	  Cryptography	  and	  Coding	  

	  
	  

Courses	  offered	  by	  IDRP	  Digital	  Humanities	  
• Digital	  Humanities	  

	  
	   	  

	  
 



 
	  

Title Data structures and practices Number CSP7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech. Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Computer Programming   
 
Objectives  

The Instructor will: 
1.  Explain various data structures and provide details to implement and use them in different 

algorithms 
 
Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Write, debug and rectify the programs using different data structures  
2.  Expertise in transforming coding skills into algorithm design and implementation 
 
Contents  
 
Laboratory Experiments  
Exercises based on 
Abstract Data Types: Arrays, link-list/list, hash tables, dictionaries, structures, stack, queues  
(4 labs) 
Data Structures: Heap, Sets, Sparse matrix, Binary Search Tree, B-Tree/ B+ Tree, Graph  (4 
labs) 
Algorithm implementation: Quick or Merge sort, Breadth or Depth first search or Dijkstra’s 
Shortest Path First algorithm, Dynamic programing (6 labs) 
 
Textbook 
1. Weiss, M. A. (2007), Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C++, Addison-Wesley. 
2. Lipschutz, S. (2017), Data Structures with C, McGraw Hill Education. 
3. Cormen, T. H., Leiserson, C. E., Rivest, R. L. and Stein, C., (2009), Introduction to 
Algorithms, MIT Press. 
     
Online Course Material  
1. Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT 
Delhi, http://www.nptelvideos.in/2012/11/data-structures-and-algorithms.html 
 

	   	  

	  
 



 
 

Title Artificial Intelligence I Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Cover various paradigms that come under the broad umbrella of AI. 
  
 
Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.  Develop an understanding of where and how AI can be used. 
 

Contents  
Introduction (1 lecture)  
Propositional logic (8 lectures)  
Search: Uninformed strategies (BFS, DFS, Dijkstra), Informed strategies (A* search, heuristic  
functions, hill-climbing), Adversarial search (Minimax algorithm, Alpha-beta pruning) (10  
lectures)  
Predicate logic: Knowledge representation, Resolution (6 lectures)  
Rule-based systems: Natural language parsing, Context free grammar (3 lectures)  
Constraint satisfaction problems (4 lectures)  
Planning: State space search, Planning Graphs, Partial order planning (4 lectures)  
Uncertain Reasoning: Probabilistic reasoning, Bayesian Networks, Dempster-Shafer theory,  
Fuzzy logic (6 lectures)  
 
Textbook  

1.Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd Edition,  
      Prentice Hall 

 
Reference Books  

1. Research literature  
 

Self Learning Material  
1.   Department of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley,  
      http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD52D2B739E4D1C5F  
2.   NPTEL: Artificial Intelligence, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105077/  
 

 
  

	  
 



 
Title Artificial Intelligence II Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Artificial Intelligence-1   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 

1.  Cover modern paradigms of AI that go beyond traditional learning.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to:  

1.  Develop an understanding of modern concepts in AI and where they can be used. 
2.  Design, implement and apply novel AI techniques based on emerging real-world  
     requirements. 
 

Contents  
CSL8XX1: Artificial Intelligence: Probabilistic Reasoning and Knowledge 
Representation 1-0-0[1] 
Probabilistic Reasoning over time: Hidden Markov Models, Kalman Filters, Dynamic  
Bayesian Networks (7 lectures)  
Knowledge Representation: Ontological engineering, Semantic Networks, Description Logics  
(7 lectures)  
 
CSL8XX1: Artificial Intelligence: Making Decisions 1-0-0[1] 
Making decisions: Utility theory, utility functions, decision networks, sequential  
decision problems, Partially Observable MDPs, Game Theory (14 lectures)  
 
CSL8XX1: Artificial Intelligence: Reinforcement Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Reinforcement Learning: Passive RL, Active RL, Generalization in RL, Policy 
Search, Deep Reinforcement Learning (14 lectures)  
 
Textbook  

1.Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd Edition,  
      Prentice Hall 

 
Reference Books  

1. Yang, Q. (1997), Intelligent Planning: A decomposition and abstraction based approach, 
Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.    

 
 
  

	  
 



 
Title Machine Learning I Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None    
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 

1.  Provide motivation and understanding of the need and importance of Machine Learning 
in today’s world  

2.  Provide details about various algorithms in Machine Learning  
 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop a sense of Machine Learning in the modern context, and independently work   

on problems relating to Machine Learning  
2. Design and program efficient algorithms related to Machine Learning, train models,  

conduct experiments, and deliver ML-based applications  
 

Contents 
 
CSL7XX1: Machine Learning I: Supervised Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic regression (2 
lectures)  
Gradient Descent: Introduction, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Subgradients, Stochastic 
Gradient Descent for risk minimization (2 lectures)  
Support Vector Machines: Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel trick, 
Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels (4 lectures)  
Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests (2 lectures)  
Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural networks, SGD 
and Backpropagation (3 lectures)  
Model selection and validation: Validation for model selection, k-fold cross-validation, Training-
Validation-Testing split, Regularized loss minimization (1 lectures)  
 
CSL7XX2: Machine Learning I: Unsupervised Learning and Generative Models 1-0-
0[1] 
Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality (1 lecture)  
Clustering: Linkage-based clustering algorithms, k-means algorithm, Spectral clustering (3 
lectures)  
Dimensionality reduction: Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, Compressed 
sensing (2 lectures)  
Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimator, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant Analysis, 
Latent variables and Expectation-maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning (5 lectures)  
Feature Selection and Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations, Feature learning 
(3 lectures)  
CSL7XX3: Machine Learning I: Computational Learning Theory and Deep Neural 
Networks 1-0-0[1] 
Statistical Learning Framework: PAC learning, Agnostic PAC learning, Bias-complexity tradeoff, 
No free lunch theorem, VC dimension, Structural risk minimization, Adaboost (7 lectures)  
Foundations of Deep Learning: DNN, CNN, RNN, Autoencoders (7 lectures)  
 
Textbook 

1. Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben-David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From 
Theory to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press  
 

Reference Books  
1. Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill  
 

Self Learning Material  
1.   Department of Computer Science, Stanford University,  
      https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229  

  

	  
 



 
Title Machine Learning II Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Machine Learning-1   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 

1.  Provide technical details about various recent algorithms and software platforms related 
to Machine Learning with specific focus on Deep Learning.  
 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Design and program efficient algorithms related to recent machine learning techniques,  
      train models, conduct experiments, and develop real-world ML-based applications and 
      products   

 
Contents  
CSL7XX1: Machine Learning II: Introduction to Deep Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Model Search: Optimization, Regularization, AutoML (4 lectures)  
Deep Networks: Attention layers, Gated CNNs, Graph Neural Networks (8 lectures)  
Applications: Neural language models (2 lectures)  
 
CSL7XX2: Machine Learning II: Representation Learning & Structured Models 1-0-
0[1] 
Representation Learning: Unsupervised pre-training, transfer learning and domain adaptation, 
distributed representation, discovering underlying causes (7 lectures)  
Structured models: learning about dependencies, inference and approximate inference, 
sampling and Monte Carlo Methods, Importance Sampling, Gibbs Sampling, Partition Function, 
MAP inference and Sparse Coding, Variational Inference (7 lectures)  
 
CSL7XX3: Machine Learning II: Deep Generative Models 1-0-0[1] 
Deep Generative Models: Deep Belief Networks, Variational Autoencoder, Generative 
Adversarial Network (GAN), Deep Convolutional GAN, Autoencoder GANs, iGAN, pix2pix, 
CycleGAN, Conditional GANs, StackGAN (14 lectures)  
 
Laboratory Experiments  
Overview of Deep Learning platforms such Tensorflow and PyTorch.  
 
Textbook 

1.Goodfellow,I., Bengio.,Y., and Courville,A., (2016), Deep Learning, The MIT Press  
 

Reference Books  
1. Charniak, E. (2019), Introduction to deep learning, The MIT Press.  
 
Self Learning Material  
1.   https://www.deeplearningbook.org/  

 
  

	  
 



 
Title Real Time Autonomous Systems Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Machine Learning I, Artificial Intelligence I   
 
Objectives  

 
The Instructor will: 

1. Provide an understanding about autonomous/ semi autonomous systems like autonomous 
cars and drones.  

 
  

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
 
1. Understand and use the methodologies to design, model and implementation of 

autonomous systems for real time applications.  
         

Contents 
 
Introduction to Agents, Agent Architectures: Subsumption Architecture, Situated Automata, 
Hybrid Architecture (4) 
 
Real time System Implementation (3) 
 
Mobile agents – locomotion (wheeled, legged, aerial), sensors and mechanisms. (3) 
 
Robot localisation & SLAM (4) 
 
Planning and Navigation (6) 
 
Case Study: Autonomous car – learning to drive; human centered autonomous vehicle. (8) 
 
 
Laboratory Experiments  
 
Textbook  
1. Seigwart, R. and Nourbakhsh, I.R. Introduction to Autonomous Mobile Robots, 2nd edition, 

MIT Press 2011 
2. Giorgio C. Buttazzo, Hard Real-Time Computing Systems: Predictable Scheduling Algorithms 

and Applications,” Springer US, Year: 2011 
3. Stuart J. Russell and Peter Norwig, Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd edition, 

Pearson Press 
4. Markus Maurer et al. eds. Autonomous Driving, Springer Link (open access) 
5. Gerhard Weiss ed., Multiagent System, Second Edition, MIT Press, 2013 
 
Reference Books  
1. Tzafestas, S. G. (Ed.). (2012). Advances in intelligent autonomous systems (Vol. 18). 
Springer Science & Business Media. 
2. Ge, S. S. (2006). Autonomous mobile robots: sensing, control, decision making and 
applications. CRC press. 

1. 3. Mhamed Itmi, Alain Cardon(2016),  New Autonomous Systems,  Wiley-ISTE. 
2. 4. De Gyurky, S. M., & Tarbell, M. A. (2013). The Autonomous System: A Foundational 

Synthesis of the Sciences of the Mind. John Wiley & Sons. 
 
 
 

 

	  
 



 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

 
 

Course Booklet  
 

for 

 
M.Tech. (CSE)  

 
and  
 

Dual degree M.Tech. (CSE) + PhD  
 

 
Programs  

 
 

offered by the 
 
 

Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
 
 
 
 
 
 

July 2019 
 
  

 



 
M.Tech and M.Tech-Ph.D dual degree programs  
in Computer Science and Engineering 
Introduction: 
Traditionally Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) teaching were focusing on two major areas, 
i.e., theories and systems (database, computer hardware, and operating systems). With the advent of 
the era of Cloud Computing, Edge Computing, AI and Big Data, the discipline is being transformed 
by incorporation of new emerging technologies. It is becoming an instrumental tool in solving major 
problems faced by modern society such as energy, natural disasters, pollution, and water. Through 
this newly revamped M.Tech and M.Tech-Ph.D dual degree programs in CSE, IIT Jodhpur is making 
a conscious effort to divulge from the traditional path and planning to reposition itself to become a 
leading institute in this new genre of Computer Science education. 
Objectives: 
This M.Tech and M.Tech-Ph.D dual degree programs in CSE will offer students with deep 
knowledge of core and applied computer science. Through this programme, a student will learn niche 
subject areas which are of paramount importance in the modern big data era, such as Computer 
Systems and Security. This programme is aiming at imparting the necessary breadth and depth to the 
students for pursuing careers in academics as well as in industry. This programme is aiming at 
extending undergraduate computing skills with up-to-date and in-depth expertise in specialized areas 
of Computer Systems and Security. 
Expected Graduate Attributes: 
After completing this programme, a student will be able to develop an ability to: 

1. Understand fundamental concepts and hands-on knowledge of emerging fields in Computer 
Science.  

2. Conceive, Design and Develop state-of-the-art scalable parallel and distributed systems 
3. Solve Big data problems through the knowledge of advanced data structures, distributed 

algorithmic design, analysis, and applications.  
4. Design and develop network protocols for Wireless, Sensor, Mobile, and Vehicular networks.  
5. Ideate, Implement and Integrate cryptographic, fault tolerant algorithms for large scale 

distributed systems  
6. Understand state-of-the-art hardware platforms for running compute intensive distributed 

algorithms 
7. Ability to understand and apply evolving ethics and privacy laws across various domains and 

territories. 
8. Plan and manage technical projects 

 
Learning Outcome: 

1. Understand the fundamentals of algorithmic complexity, advanced computer architecture, 
advanced network, and security protocols. 

2. Apply appropriate design principles, framework and protocols to develop dependable 
systems. 

3. Demonstrate hands-on knowledge of cutting edge simulation, synthesizing, programming 
tools. 

4. Ability to design and develop system architecture for mobile, cloud, fog, and edge 
computing.  

5. Demonstrate hands-on knowledge of virtualization, data center design and management, and 
software defined networking. 

6. Skills to comprehend and communicate effectively.  
7. Apply appropriate project and business management principles and tools for real-world 

problems.  
	   	  

	  
 



 
Course	  Structure	  for	  the	  	  

M.Tech.	  (CSE)	  Program	  and	  	  
Dual	  Degree	  M.Tech.	  (CSE)+Ph.D.	  Program	  

 
	  

Cat	   Code	   Course	  Title	   L-­‐T-­‐P	  Cr	   	   Cat	   Code	   Course	  Title	   L-­‐T-­‐P	  Cr	  
I	  Semester	   	   II	  Semester	  

C	   MAL7xx0	   Statistics	  I	  	   1-­‐0-­‐0	   3	   	   C	   CSL7xx0	   Computer	  Architecture	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  
Matrix	  Computation	  	  1-­‐0-­‐0	  
Optimization	   1-­‐0-­‐0	  

C	   CSL7xx0	   Algorithms	  for	  Big	   2-­‐0-­‐0	  2	   	   C	   CSL7xx0	   Software	  and	  Data	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  
Data	   Engineering	  

C	   CSL7xx0	   Machine	  Learning	  I	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	   	   C	   CSL7xx0	   Security	  and	  its	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  
applications	  

C	   CSP7xx0	   Data	  Structures	  and	   0-­‐0-­‐2	  1	   	   PE	   xxxxx	   Program	  Elective	  3	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  
Practices	  

PE	   xxxxx	   Program	  Elective	  1	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	   	   OE	   xxxxx	   Open	  Elective	  1	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	  
PE	   xxxxx	   Program	  Elective	  2	   3-­‐0-­‐0	  3	   	   NG	   xxxxx	   Ethics	  and	  Professional	  Life	   1-­‐0-­‐0	   1	  
NG	   	   Technical	   1-­‐0-­‐0	   1	   	   	   	   	   	   	  

Communication	  
Total	  Credits:	  16	  	   Total	  Credits:	  16	  

*Maths	  Fractals:	  Linear	  Algebra,	  Probability	  and	  Random	  Processes,	  Optimization	  
	  

Cat	   Code	   Course	  Title	   L-­‐T-­‐P	   Cr	   	   Cat	   Code	   Course	  Title	   L-­‐T-­‐P	   Cr	  
III	  Semester	   	   IV	  Semester	  

P	   CSD7xx Major	  Project	  –	  Part	  1	   0-­‐0-­‐10	   5	   	   P	   CSD8x Major	  Project	  –	  Part	  2	   0-­‐0-­‐22	   11	  
0	   x0	  

PE	   xxxxx	   Program	  Elective	  4	   3-­‐0-­‐0	   3	   	   PE	   xxxxx	   Program	  Elective	  6	   3-­‐0-­‐0	   3	  
PE	   xxxxx	   Program	  Elective	  5	   3-­‐0-­‐0	   3	   	   NG	   xxxxx	   Intellectual	  Property	   1-­‐0-­‐0	   1	  
OE	   xxxxx	   Open	  Elective	  -­‐	  2	   3-­‐0-­‐0	   3	   	   	   	   	   	   	  
NG	   xxxxx	   System	  Design	   1-­‐0-­‐0	   1	   	   	   	   	   	   	  

Total	  Credits:	  15	  	   Total	  Credits:	  15	  
	  

Credit	  Distribution	  
1	   Program	  Core	   18	  credits	  
2	   Program	  Electives	   18	  credits	  
3	   Open	  Electives	   6	  credits	  
4	   Project	   16	  credits	  
5	   Non-­‐graded	  	   4	  credits	  

Total	   62	  credits	  
	  

	   	  

	  
 



 
	  

Program	  Electives	  for	  M.Tech.	  (CSE)	  and	  	  
Dual	  Degree	  M.Tech.	  (CSE)+Ph.D.	  Program	  

	  
Courses	  offered	  by	  Department	  of	  Computer	  Science	  and	  Engineering	  

• Advanced	  Computer	  Graphics	  
• AI	  for	  Finance	  
• Artificial	  Intelligence	  I	  
• Artificial	  Intelligence	  II	  
• Bio-­‐image	  computing	  
• Blockchain	  
• Computer	  Graphics	  
• Computer	  Vision	  
• Computational	  Optimization	  
• Data	  Visualization	  
• Dependable	  AI	  
• Digital	  Image	  Analysis	  
• Edge	  and	  Fog	  Computing	  
• Embedded	  Systems	  
• GPU	  Programming	  
• Graph	  Theory	  and	  Applications	  
• Human	  Machine	  Interface	  
• Information	  Retrieval	  and	  Web	  Mining	  
• Introduction	  to	  Augmented	  Reality	  and	  Virtual	  Reality	  
• Machine	  Learning	  II	  
• Machine	  Learning	  with	  Big	  Data	  
• Natural	  Language	  Processing	  
• Neuromorphic	  Computing	  and	  Design	  
• Real	  time	  Autonomous	  Systems	  
• Ad	  hoc	  Wireless	  Networks	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Artificial	  Intelligence	  -­‐	  I	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Artificial	  Intelligence	  -­‐	  II	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Artificial	  Intelligence	  -­‐	  III	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Computer	  Science	  -­‐	  I	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Computer	  Science	  -­‐	  II	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Computer	  Science	  -­‐	  III	  
• Social	  Network	  Analysis	  
• Speech	  processing	  
• Stream	  Analytics	  
• Vehicular	  Ad-­‐hoc	  Networks	  (VANETs)	  

	  

Courses	  offered	  by	  Department	  of	  Electrical	  Engineering	  
• Adaptive	  Signal	  Processing	  
• Advanced	  Control	  System	  
• Advanced	  Digital	  Communication	  
• Advanced	  Signal	  Processing	  
• Analog	  and	  Interfacing	  Circuits	  
• Antenna	  Engineering	  
• Applied	  Optimization	  for	  Wireless	  Communication	  

	  
 



 
• Backhaul	  Networks	  for	  Wireless	  Systems	  
• Coding	  Theory	  
• Compressive	  Sensing	  	  
• Computational	  Imaging	  
• Cyber	  Physical	  System	  Modelling	  Laboratory	  
• Data	  Compression	  
• Digital	  image	  and	  Video	  Processing	  Lab	  
• Digital	  Image	  Processing	  and	  Applications	  
• Digital	  Signal	  Processing	  
• Digital	  Video	  Processing	  
• Digital	  VLSI	  	  Design	  
• Embedded	  System	  Design	  
• Embedded	  System	  Design	  Lab	  
• Flexible	  and	  Printed	  Electronics	  
• Free	  Space	  Optical	  Communications	  
• GNSS	  Signal	  Processing	  
• Image	  Sensor	  Design	  and	  Applications	  
• Introduction	  to	  Cyber-­‐Physical	  Systems	  
• Machine	  Learning	  for	  Communication	  
• Mathematical	  Modelling	  and	  Simulation	  
• Microfluidics	  Technology	  
• Microsystems	  Fabrication	  Technology	  
• Millimeter	  Wave	  Technology	  
• Multi-­‐rate	  Digital	  Signal	  Processing	  
• Nanosensors	  
• Network	  Information	  Theory	  
• Neuromorphic	  computing	  and	  design	  
• Optical	  Fiber	  Communications	  
• Optimal	  Filtering	  
• Physical	  Layer	  Security	  
• Principles	  of	  Data	  and	  System	  Security	  
• Real	  Time	  Communications	  
• Resource	  Constrained	  AI	  
• RF	  IC	  Design	  
• RF	  IC	  Design	  Lab	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Communication	  I	  	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Communication	  I	  	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Communication	  II	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Communication	  III	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Sensors	  &	  IoT	  I	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Sensors	  &	  IoT	  II	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Sensors	  &	  IoT	  III	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Signal	  Processing	  I	  	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Signal	  Processing	  II	  
• Selected	  Topics	  in	  Signal	  Processing	  III	  
• Sensors	  and	  IoT	  Lab	  
• Sensors	  and	  Measurement	  
• Smart	  Grid	  
• Speech	  and	  Audio	  Signal	  Processing	  
• Statistical	  Decision	  Theory	  

	  
 



 
• Systems-­‐on-­‐Chips	  Design	  
• VLSI	  Design	  Lab	  
• Wavelets	  
• Wireless	  Communication	  
• Wireless	  Networks	  

	  
Courses	  offered	  by	  Department	  of	  Mechanical	  Engineering	  

• Robotics	  

	  
Courses	  offered	  by	  Department	  of	  Bioscience	  and	  Bioengineering	  

• Bioinformatics	  
• Computational	  Biology	  

	  
Courses	  offered	  by	  Department	  of	  Mathematics	  

• Financial	  Engineering	  
• Computational	  finance	  
• Computational	  Game	  Theory	  
• Advanced	  topics	  in	  computational	  PDE	  
• Dynamical	  Systems	  
• Stochastic	  Processes	  
• Representation	  of	  Finite	  Groups	  

	  

	  
Courses	  offered	  by	  Department	  of	  Physics	  

• Quantum	  Computing	  
• Quantum	  Information	  Processing	  
• Quantum	  Cryptography	  and	  Coding	  

	  
	  

Courses	  offered	  by	  IDRP	  Digital	  Humanities	  
• Digital	  Humanities	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

 



 
	   	  

	  
 



 
Title Algorithms for Big Data Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will:  
1.  Introduce some algorithmic techniques developed for handling large amounts of data.  
2.  Emphasize on both theoretical as well as practical aspects of such algorithms.  
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to:  

1.  Analyze existing algorithms as well as design novel algorithms pertaining to big data.  
 

Contents  
Sketching and Streaming: Extremely small-space data structures (4 lectures)  
 
Numerical linear algebra: Algorithms for big matrices, Regression, Low-rank approximation, 
Matrix completion (8 lectures)  
 
Compressed Sensing: Sparse signals, Linear measurements, Signal recovery (8 lectures)  
 
External memory and cache-obliviousness: Minimizing I/O for large datasets, Algorithms and 
data structures such as B-trees, Buffer trees, Multiway mergesort (8 lectures)  
 
Reference Books  
Markovsky I, (2014), Low Rank Approximation: Algorithms, Implementation, Applications, 
Springer 
Eldar Y C., Kutyniok G. (2012), Compressed Sensing: Theory and Applications, Cambridge 
University Press.  
 
Self Learning Material  
1.   Department of Computer Science, Harvard University, Algorithms for Big Data  
  

	  
 



 
 

Title Data structures and practices Number CSP7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for M.Tech. (CSE) 1st Year Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Computer Programming   
 
Objectives  

The Instructor will: 
1. Explain various data structures and provide details to implement and use them in 
different algorithms 
 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Write, debug and rectify the programs using different data structures  
2. Expertise in transforming coding skills into algorithm design and implementation 
 

Contents  
 
Laboratory Experiments  
Exercises based on 
Abstract Data Types: Arrays, link-list/list, hash tables, dictionaries, structures, stack, queues  
(4 labs) 
Data Structures: Heap, Sets, Sparse matrix, Binary Search Tree, B-Tree/ B+ Tree, Graph  (4 
labs) 
Algorithm implementation: Quick or Merge sort, Breadth or Depth first search or Dijkstra’s 
Shortest Path First algorithm, Dynamic programing (6 labs) 
 
Textbook 

1.Weiss, M. A. (2007), Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C++, Addison-Wesley. 
2. Lipschutz, S. (2017), Data Structures with C, McGraw Hill Education. 
3.Cormen, T. H., Leiserson, C. E., Rivest, R. L. and Stein, C., (2009), Introduction to 
Algorithms, MIT Press 

 
 

 
Online Course Material  
1. Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT 
Delhi, http://www.nptelvideos.in/2012/11/data-structures-and-algorithms.html 

 
 
  

	  
 



 
 
Title Software and Data Engineering Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  

The Instructor will: 
1.  Discuss techniques to manage a large amount of data 
2.  Provide mechanisms to design and develop data-intensive computing systems 

 
Learning Outcomes  

     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design complex end-to-end data pipeline for data processing 
2.  Critically identify and use the tools for data handling and management 
3.  Use modern software technologies to design and develop data analytical systems 

 
 

Contents 
CSL7XX0 Cloud Computing and Virtualization 1-0-0 [1] 
Basics of complex software design: Concept of modular software, microservices, 
communication, 4+1 architectural views and patterns (5 lectures) 
Cloud Computing: Architecture of cluster computing, design of data centers, open data center 
platforms, fault-tolerant system design (5 lectures) 
Virtualization: Type-1 and Type-2 virtualization, virtual machine, containers, dockers (4 
lectures)  
CSL7XX0 Data Management 1-0-0 [1] 
Data Management: Structured data, relational database management, unstructured data, 
semi-structured data,  Nosql database management (mongodb), column database, graph 
database, XML, JSON, HDFS, Handling drift in data, sensor data reliability at software and 
algorithmic level, sensor data analysis techniques (14 lectures)  
CSL7XX0 Data Intensive Processing Systems 1-0-0 [1] 
Data Intensive Processing Systems: Architecture of large scale data processing systems, 
Hadoop, Apache Spark, Storm, parallel data processing concepts such as map-reduce, directed 
acyclic graph, resilient distributed datasets, dynamic resource allocation, partial & shared 
computation, storage architecture  (14 lectures) 
 
Textbook  

1.  Bass L., Clements P., Kazman R., (2012), Software Architecture in Practice, 3rd edition, 
Addison-Wesley Professional 
2.  Martin K., (2017), Designing Data-Intensive Applications: The Big Ideas Behind Reliable, 
Scalable, and Maintainable Systems, 1st Edition, O'Reilly Media 

 
Self Learning Material  
1.  Tylor,R.N., Medvidovic,N. and Dashofy,E.M., (2014), Software Architecture Foundation: 
Theory and Practice, Wiley  

 
Preparatory Course Material 

1. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 
2. International Conference on Data Engineering  

 
  

	  
 



 
 

Title Computer Architecture Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 2nd Year Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Computer Organization   
 
Objectives  

The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide background to understand various components of a modern computer system,  
     its interconnections, and performance issue 

 
Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Explain the working principles of various components of modern computer systems 
2.   Compare between systems using benchmark data 
3.   Write, execute and debug parallel programs on GPU 

 
Contents 
CSL7XX0 Multi System Architecture 1-0-0 [1] 
Introduction: Defining Computer Architecture, Flynn’s Classification of Computers, Metrics for 
Performance Measurement. (4 lectures) 
Memory Hierarchy: Introduction, Advanced Optimizations of Cache Performance, Memory 
Technology and Optimizations, Virtual Memory and Virtual Machines, The Design of Memory 
Hierarchies, Introduction to Pin Instrumentation and Cache grind, Case Study: Intel Core i7  
(10 lectures) 
CSL7XX0 Multicore Processing 1-0-0 [1] 

Instruction-Level Parallelism: Instruction-level Parallelism: Concepts and  
Challenges, Basic Compiler Techniques for Exposing ILP, Reducing Branch Costs with  
Advanced Branch Prediction, Dynamic Scheduling, Superscalar, Limitations of ILP, Case  
Study: Dynamic Scheduling in Intel Core i7. (9 lectures) 

Multicore Processor: Introduction, CPU Interconnections, Network on Chip (NoC), Routing 
Protocols, Quality of Service on NoC. (5 lectures) 
CSL7XX0 Fundamentals of Parallel Programming  1-0-0 [1] 
Data Level Parallelism: Introduction, Vector Architecture, SIMD Instruction Set Extensions for 
Multimedia, Graphics Processing Units, GPU Memory Hierarchy, Detecting and Enhancing 
Loop- Level Parallelism, CUDA Programming, Case Study: Nvidia Maxwell. (14 lectures) 

 
Textbook  

1. 1. Hennessy,J.L. and Patterson,D.A., (2012), Computer Architecture: A Quantitative 
Approach, 5th Edition, Morgan Kauffmann Publishers  

2. 2. Shen,J.P. and Lipasti,M.H., (2005), Modern Processor Design: Fundamentals of Superscalar 
Processors, McGraw-Hill Publishers  
 
Self-Learning Material  

1.  1.  CUDA: https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-zone 
3.  2.  OpenMP: https://www.openmp.org/ 

     
Preparatory Course Material  
1.  Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106134/ 
 

 
  

	  
 



 
Title Machine Learning-1 Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None    
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 

1.  Provide motivation and understanding of the need and importance of Machine Learning 
in today’s world  

2.  Provide details about various algorithms in Machine Learning  
 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop a sense of Machine Learning in the modern context, and independently work   

on problems relating to Machine Learning  
2. Design and program efficient algorithms related to Machine Learning, train models,  

conduct experiments, and deliver ML-based applications  
 

Contents  
 
CSL7XX1: Introduction to Machine Learning: Supervised Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic regression (2 
lectures)  
Gradient Descent: Introduction, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Subgradients, Stochastic 
Gradient Descent for risk minimization (2 lectures)  
Support Vector Machines: Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel trick, 
Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels (4 lectures)  
Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests (2 lectures)  
Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural networks, SGD 
and Backpropagation (3 lectures)  
Model selection and validation: Validation for model selection, k-fold cross-validation, Training-
Validation-Testing split, Regularized loss minimization (1 lectures)  
 
CSL7XX2: Introduction to Machine Learning: Unsupervised Learning and Generative 
Models 1-0-0[1] 
Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality (1 lecture)  
Clustering: Linkage-based clustering algorithms, k-means algorithm, Spectral clustering (3 
lectures)  
Dimensionality reduction: Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, Compressed 
sensing (2 lectures)  
Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimator, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant Analysis, 
Latent variables and Expectation-maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning (5 lectures)  
Feature Selection and Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations, Feature learning 
(3 lectures)  
CSL7XX3: Introduction to Machine Learning: Computational Learning Theory and 
Deep Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Statistical Learning Framework: PAC learning, Agnostic PAC learning, Bias-complexity tradeoff, 
No free lunch theorem, VC dimension, Structural risk minimization, Adaboost (7 lectures)  
Foundations of Deep Learning: DNN, CNN, RNN, Autoencoders (7 lectures)  
Textbook 

1. Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben-David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From 
Theory to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press  
 

Reference Books  
1. Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill  
 

Self Learning Material  
1.   Department of Computer Science, Stanford University,  
      https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229  

 
  

	  
 



 
Title Security and Its Application Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective   
Prerequisite Networks   
Objectives  

The Instructor will:  
1.  Provide the fundamental principles of access control models and techniques, authentication 
and secure system design 
2.  Introduce a strong understanding of different cryptographic protocols and techniques and be 
able to use them 
3.   Provide methods for authentication, access control, intrusion detection and prevention 
Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.   Understand cryptography and network security concepts and application 
2.   Identify and investigate network security threat 
3.   Analyze and design network security protocols  
Contents 
CSL7xx1 Introduction to Cryptography 1-0-0 [1] 
Shannon’s Approach to Cryptography: Measures of security, Perfect secrecy, Definition of 
entropy, One-time pad (3 lectures) 
Symmetric Key Cryptography: The notion of a symmetric key cryptography, The Data Encryption 
Standard (DES) and differential cryptanalysis, The Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) (4 
lectures) 
Cryptographic Hash Functions: Definition of hash functions and properties, Unkeyed hash 
functions, Keyed hash functions, Message Authentication Codes (MAC), The Random Oracle 
Model (ROM) (4 lectures) 
Authentication: Definition of authentication, A simple authentication protocol and possible 
attacks, Strong password protocols, BM Encrypted Key Exchange (EKE), Key Distribution Centers 
(KDC), Certification authorities and certificate revocation, KDC based authentication protocols (3 
lectures) 
CSL7xx2 Network Security  1-0-0 [1] 
Public Key Cryptosystems: Fundamentals of Public-key Cryptography, Background on number 
theory, The RSA public key cryptosystem, The ElGamal public key cryptosystem and discrete 
logs Digital Signatures: An RSA based signature scheme, The ElGamal based signature 
scheme,The Schnorr signature scheme, The Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA) (6 lectures) 
Key Distribution and Key Agreement Protocols: Key Predistribution: Diffie-Hellman key 
Exchange, The MTI key Exchange (4 lectures) 
Network Security: TCP/IP threats, The IPSEC protocol, The SSL and TLS protocols, Firewalls and 
Virtual Private Networks (VPNs), Electronic mail security, Worms, DDoS attacks, BGB and 
security considerations (4 lectures) 
CSL7xx3 Cyber-physical security and Blockchain 1-0-0 [1] 
(fractal 3) Cyber-physical security: IoT security, sensor actuator network security (4 
lectures) Block Chain: Introduction to Blockchain, Blockchain Architecture and Design, 
Consensus (Byzantine Fault, Proof of Work, Poof of Stake,), Permissioned 
Blockchains, Components of blockchain (10 lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments  
Programming exercises using Exata and  AVISPA Tools  
Textbook  

1.Stallings, W. (2017). Cryptography and network security, 7/E. Pearson Education India  
2. Douglas R. Stinson, Maura B. Paterson (2018). Cryptography: theory and practice. 4/E 
Chapman and Hall/CRC  

Reference Books  
1. Mao, W. (2004). Modern cryptography: theory and practice. Pearson Education India 

2.   Pfleeger, C. P., & Pfleeger, S. L. (2018). Security in computing. 5/E,  Prentice Hall 
Professional Technical Reference 
3.   Goldreich, O. (2009). Foundations of cryptography: volume 2, basic applications. Cambridge 
university press 
4.   Forouzan, B. A. (2015). Cryptography & network security. 3/E, McGraw-Hill, Inc.  
Self Learning Material  
1.   Network and Computer Security - MIT OpenCourseWare 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-857-network-and-

	  
 



 
computer-security-spring-2014/ 
2.   Cryptography I,  Coursera, Stanford University, https://www.coursera.org/learn/crypto 

 

	  
 



 

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

 

   

 

 

 

 

PG Course Booklet 

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

July 2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

M.Tech & M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree Program 

in 

Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

1. Introduction 

The biological world is full of natural wonders beginning from microscopic bacteria to multicellular 
organisms. Using a reductionist approach, each organism can be broken down into its subsystems, 
which continue to provide us with new knowledge on how evolution has perfected these systems 
over millennia. Conversely, one can also take a systems biology approach and appreciate the whole 
organism as a system that grows and continuously adapts to the environment. Beginning from 
thermodynamically efficient cellular systems to the molecular motors of the flagellar motor, each 
product of evolution is an optimized engineering design which can be translated into real-life 
applications across disciplines. Furthermore, the call for support from today’s data-driven biology 
has been answered by advancements in computational biology that permit solving biology 
problems using artificial intelligence and machine learning approaches. Genomics, proteomics, 
transcriptomics and metabolomics have transformed the landscape of infectious and non-infectious 
diseases allowing development of new diagnostic measures as well as therapeutics. In combination 
with active contribution from Electronic, Mechanical, Materials engineering, implantable sensor and 
support devices that are bio-compatible have significantly contributed to extending the healthy 
lifespan of the human race. The Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering aspires to cater to the 
technological requirements of the country by conducting high-quality, translatable, and 
interdisciplinary research in the aforementioned focus areas. 

2. Objective of the Programme 

To produce professionals with an in-depth knowledge of biological systems and phenomena, with 
critical thinking and bioengineering research skills that can be effectively put to use in solving 
problems in focus domains including Healthcare, Energy, Environment, and Agriculture. The 
program will help graduates to approach problems in the above focus domains by providing 
knowledge and hands-on laboratory training in the areas of data driven multi-omics technologies, 
artificial intelligence & computational biology, systems biology, imaging-based diagnostics, 
biomaterials, and bio-therapeutics. 

 

 

 



 

3. Expected Graduate Attributes 

Graduates will 

1. Be able to think critically and solve problems that are necessary for employment in 
biomedical, biotechnology, pharmaceutical industries, National research labs and Academic 
institutions at the global level. 

2. Develop a sense of ownership on the National missions for technology development, which 
will cater to societal needs such as affordable healthcare, clean energy, safe environment, 
and sustainable agriculture. 

3. Be exceptionally well trained in the laboratory enabling them to conduct high-quality, 
reproducible research. 

4. Be able to read, understand and review intellectual property documents and recognize their 
rights. 

5. Be able to express their research ideas and present their data clearly in written and spoken 
format. 

6. Develop a strong work ethic and understand ethical considerations in biological research, 
which are both necessary for high-quality research. 

7. Develop healthy time management skills to plan and manage laboratory work as well as 
other miscellaneous research-associated demands on their time to effectively meet 
deadlines. 

 

4. Learning Outcomes 

 

Graduates will 

• Be introduced to cutting-edge, interdisciplinary research areas like Diagnostics & 
Therapeutics development, Instrumentation design & Development, Multi-omics 
Technologies & Applications, Biomedical Imaging& Image processing, Systems & Synthetic 
Biology and Biomaterials Engineering, Artificial Intelligence for biological applications  

• Be exposed to common problems that are prevalent in the domains of affordable healthcare, 
clean energy, safe environment, and sustainable agriculture, allowing them to innovate and 
develop technological solutions for the same. 

• Receive effective, hands-on laboratory training as a part of laboratory courses and short-
term research projects that are designed to teach research methodology and common lab 
techniques. 

• Be introduced to Patents and other intellectual property documents, the rights that they 
grant and necessary considerations while filing patents / technology that is protected by 
patents. 

• Develop their research communication skills by participating in seminars, journal clubs; 
manuscript writing and research grant writing workshops. 

• Receive training on building a work ethic by being a part of research groups working 
towards a common goal. Graduates will also appreciate the ethical and safety considerations 
while conducting biomedical research. 

• Be taught how to prioritize items on their schedule and how to budget time across the 
spectrum of activities including research and other necessary tasks. 



5. Topic Clouds 

5.1 Master Topic Cloud - Course Overview 

 

 

5.2 Sub-Cloud - 1 - Bioimaging 

 

 

 

  



5.3 Sub-Cloud - 2 - Omics 

 

5.4 Sub-Cloud - 3 - Biosensors 

 

 

 

 

  



5.5 Sub-cloud - 4 - Systems Biology 

 

 

5.6 Sub-Cloud - 5 - Biomaterial Engineering 

 

 

  



 

 

5.7 Sub-Cloud - 6- Bioenergy & Environment technologies  

 

 



6.  M. Tech. Bioscience and Bioengineering Proposed Course structure 

 

Cat Course Title L-T-P Credits  Cat Course Title L-T-P Credits 

I Semester   II Semester 

BBL7XX0:  
BBL7XX0: Systems 

C Introduction to 2-0-0 2 C 3-0-2 4 
Biology 

OMICS Technologies  

 BBL7XX1: Types of 
Biosensors & their 

BBL7XX1: Bioimaging Characterization 
Instrumentation and 

C Acquisition  2-0-2 3 C EE7XX2: 2-0-0 2 
Microfabrication 

 Technologies, 
Interfacing and Read 
Out Electronics  

BBL7XX0:  
CS7XX2: Bioimage 

C Biomaterials 3-0-0 3 C 1-0-0 1 
Computing 

Engineering 

 
1-0-0 

MAL7XX1: Statistical 
Techniques   

BBP7XX2: Statistics 
C 3 C 0-0-2 1 

and Data Analysis Lab 
MAL7XX2: Advanced  
Statistical Techniques 

2-0-0 

PE Program Elective-1 3-0-0 3  PE Program Elective-2 1-0-0 1 

NG Technical 1-0-0 1  
PE Program Elective-3 3-0-0 3 

Communication 

     PE Program Elective-4 3-0-0 3 

     NG Innovation and IP 1-0-0 1 
Management  

Total (Graded + Non-graded) 15  Total (Graded + Non-graded) 16 

III Semester  IV Semester 

OE Open Elective-1 3-0-0 3  OE Open Elective-2 3-0-0 3 

Program Elective-5  

 
PE 3-0-0 3 TH Project-2 0-0-20 10 

 

 

PE Program Elective-6 3-0-0 3  NG Professional Ethics 1-0-0 1 



     
PE Program Elective-7 1-0-0 1 

TH Project-1 0-0-12 6      

NG Systems Engineering 1-0-0 1      
and Project 
Management 

Total (Graded + Non-graded) 17  Total (Graded + Non-graded) 14 

 

6.1 Credit Distribution 

 

Course Type Credits 

Program Core (C) 19 

Program Elective (PE) 17 

Open Elective (OE) 6 

Project 16 

Non-Graded  4 

Total (Graded + Non-Graded) 62 (58 + 4) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



6.2 M. Tech. Program in Bioscience & Bioengineering - Elective Sets  

 

Students must complete a minimum of 9 credits from one Program Elective Set. Six credits may be 
completed from other PE Set. A student can opt for any two of the given elective sets. Students 
may opt for Open Electives from anywhere in the institute. 

 

Program Elective Set 1 - Bioimaging &Health Informatics 

BBL7XX0 Fundamentals of Neuroscience [3-0-0] 

BBL7XX0 Principles of Drug Development [3-0-0] 

BBL7XX0 Introduction to Chemical Biology [3-0-0] 

CSL7XX0 Digital Image Analysis [3-0-0] 

CSL7XX0 Machine Learning-1 [3-0-0] 

CSLEEL7XX0 Image Sensor Design and Applications [3-0-0]  

PH7XX0 Introduction to Medical Physics fractal 1 & 3 [2-0-0] 

 

Program Elective Set 2- Multi-omics  

BBL7XX1 Omics Databases [1-0-0] 

MAL7XX0 Introduction to Data Science [1-0-0]  

CSL7XX2 Data Management [1-0-0]  

BBL7XX0 Proteomics Data Analysis [2-0-0] 

BBL7XX0 Microbial Genomes & Microbiomes [3-0-0] 

BBL7XX0 RNA Sequencing Data Analysis [3-0-0] 

BBL7XX0 Microarray Data Analysis [2-0-0] 

BBL7XX0 Metabolomics [3-0-0] 

BBL7XX0 Algorithms in Biology [3-0-0] 

 

Program Elective Set 3- Biological systems & Biosensors 

BBL7XX0 Disease Processes diagnostics & therapeutics [3-0-0] 

BBL7XX0 Quantitative Physiology: systems and controls of the human machine [3-0-0] 

BBP7XX0 Quantitative Physiology lab [0-0-2] 

BBL7XX0 Cell and Molecular Biology [3-0-0] 

BBL7XX0 Sensory-neural systems [3-0-0] 



BBL7XX3 Visual perception [1-0-0]  

BBL7XX2 Auditory perception: from cell to signal [1-0-0] 

BBL7XX1 Synaptic communication: function and dysfunction [1-0-0] 

BBL7XX0 Immunodiagnostics and therapeutics [2-0-2] 

BBL7XX0 Cardiovascular Physiology:  Signals, systems and controls 

BBL7XX1 Microbes as sensors [1-0-0] 

MEL7XXO Microfluidics technologies [3-0-0] 

CSL7XX0 Measurement in remote healthcare [1-0-0] 

CSL7XX0 Analog & Interfacing Circuits [3-0-0] 

CYL6XX0 Biophysical Techniques: Theory and applications [3-0-0] 

MEL7XX0 Fluid Flow in Biological Processes [2-0-0] 

 

Program Elective Set 4 – Systems Biology   

BBL7XX0 Synthetic Biology [3-0-0] 

BBL7XX0 Systems Biology in Personalized Genomics [3-0-0] 

BBL7XX0 RNA Sequencing Data Analysis [2-0-0] 

BBL7XX0 Flux Balance Analysis [3-0-0] 

BBL7XX0 Immunotechnology [3-0-0] 

CYL6XX1 Thermodynamics [1-0-0] 

CYL6XX3 Chemical Kinetics [1-0-0] 

MAL6XX0 Ordinary Differential Equations [3–0–0] 

MAL7XX0 Numerical Methods for PDE [1-0-0] 

Program Elective Set 5 – Biomaterials Engineering 

BBL7XX0 Biophysics [2-0-0] 

BBL7XX0 Biomechanics [2-0-0] 

BBL7XX0 Tissue Engineering & Medical devices and Implants [3-0-0] 

BBL7XX0 Selected topics in Biomaterials Engineering [1-0-0] 

MT7LXX0 Principles of Engineering Material Selection 3-0-0 [3] 

MTL7XX0 Computational material Engineering [3-0-0] 

Program Elective Set 6 – Bioenergy & Environmental Technologies 

BBL7XX0 Environmental Microbiology [2-0-0] 



BBL7XX0 Environmental Biotechnology and Bioremediation [3-0-0] 

BB7XX0 Bioenergy Systems [3-0-0] 

BB7XX0 Bio-electrochemical Systems [2-0-0] 

MEL7XX0 Water Energy nexus [3-0-0] 

MEL7XX0 Soil and Water Conservation engineering [3-0-0] 

MT7XX0 Industrial waste: control & utilization [3-0-0] 

 

 

6.3 List of Laboratory courses  

6.3.1. Core Labs: 

Bioimaging lab 

Systems Biology lab 

Statistics and Data Analysis lab 

 

6.3.2. Elective Labs: 

Quantitative Physiology lab 

Artificial Intelligence in bioengineering lab 

Immunodiagnostics and therapeutics [2-0-2] 

 

 

  



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Compulsory Courses / Fractals 
  



Title Bioimaging Number BBL7XX1 

CSL7XX2  

Department Biosciences & Bioengineering and L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Computer Science & Engineering 

Offered for M. Tech; PhD Program Type Compulsory 

Prerequisite    

Objectives 

The Instructors will provide students with fundamentals of bioimaging 
instrumentations, image processing and image analysis with emphasis on problems in 
the field of healthcare, agriculture and environment. 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to acquire basic knowledge and 
understanding of microscopic imaging and their applications in bioscience and 
bioengineering. 

 

Contents  

BBL7XX1 Instrumentation & Acquisition (2-0-2):  

(fractal 1) Image Formation: Lenses; Optical aberrations, Koehler illumination; 
Diffraction; Point spread function; Resolution.(5 lectures) 

Contrast Imaging Based Microscopy: Bright & Dark field, Phase contrast; Polarization; 
DIC, Fluorescent Probes & Proteins; Confocal; TIRF; Super-resolution (13 lectures) 

Image Acquisition & Analysis: Cameras; Detectors; Basic Bio image analysis  (5 
lectures) 

Imaging Modalities-X-rays, Magnetic and Gamma-rays in imaging and therapeutics, 
application of imaging in the field of biosciences (5 lectures) 

Laboratory: Demonstration of microscopic imaging principles, contrast based 
microscopy techniques, Fluorescence based imaging, biological sample preparation & 
imaging, Image detectors, Bio image analysis, Biomedical Instrumentations, 
assignments on Bioimaging tools & techniques 

 

CS7XX2 Bioimage computing (1-0-0): 

(fractal 2) Reconstruction: Mathematical models of image regularity, random fields, 
practical data sampling and acquisition schemes (4 lectures) 

Restoration: Deconvolution, degradation models for corrupted and missing data, 
Bayesian graphical modelling and inference, regression methods for filtering of 
bioimages (4 lectures) 

 



Image segmentation, delineation & classification: Clustering, graph partitioning, 
classification, mixture models, expectation maximization, variational methods using 
geometric and statistical modelling, computer aided diagnosis (4 lectures) 

Registration: Deformation models, optimization algorithms, 2D-3D registration, multi-
modal registration (2 lectures) 

 

Textbook  

1. Murphy D.B., Fundamentals of Light Microscopy and Electronic Imaging, John Wiley 
& Sons, Inc., 2nd edition 

Bankman, I., (2009), Handbook of Medical Image Processing and Analysis, 2nd Edition, 
Academic Press. 
 

Self Learning Material 

1. Basic of Light Microscopy & Imaging (The zeiss guide) 
 

Preparatory Course Material 

1. Debdoot Sheet, Bioimaging, NPTEL Course Material, Indian Institute of Technology 
Kharagpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105091/ 

2. Bishop, C., (2006), Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title Introduction to Omics Technologies Number BBL7XX0 



Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P 2–0–0  [2] 
[C] 

Offered for M.Tech.  Type Elective  

Prerequisite Nil   

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce various technologies and relevant instrumentation applicable in genomics and 
transcriptomics research 

2. Introduce the instrumentation and various technologies applicable in proteome analyses 
and provide context for generation and analyses of proteome data 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Identify the right technology and method to be used in biological experiment design 
involving genomics and transcriptomics 

2. Choose the correct proteomics technology and supporting instrumentation to answer a 
specific biological question 

Contents 

Genomics & Transcriptomics Technologies: Cell lysis & nucleic acid extraction; quality 
control; conventional nucleic acid sequencing; next-generation sequencing technologies 
& instrumentation, fragmentation, size selection & purification strategies; single 
molecule real-time sequencing technology; multiplexing strategies; strategies for aiding 
in analyses of data; microarray fabrication, hybridization &  scanning equipment ( 14 
Lectures ) 

Proteomics technologies: Protein extraction, fractionation, separation & purification, protein 
sequencing, isoelectric focusing, 1D & 2D gel electrophoresis based approaches, gel 
imaging equipment & analysis software, mass spectrometry for gel based proteomics, 
gel-independent separation & mass spectrometry methods, tandem mass spectrometry, 
quantitative proteomics (14 Lectures) 

Textbook 

1.  Lesk A., (2017), Introduction to Genomics, 3rd Edition, Oxford University Press 

2. Lovric, J., (2011), Introducing Proteomics: From Concepts to Sample Separation, Mass 
Spectrometry and Data Analysis. 11th Edition, Wiley-Blackwell. 

Reference Books 

1.  Pevsner J., (2015), Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics, 3rd Edition, Wiley 
Blackwell. 

2.  Thangadurai D., Sangeetha J., (2015), Genomics and Proteomics: Principles, 
Technoogies & applications, 1st Edition, CRC Press 

3.  Twyman R., (2013), Principles of Proteomics, 2nd Edition, CRC Press 



4.  Conn P.M., [Ed.] (2003), Handbook of Proteomic Methods, Springer 

Self-Learning Material 

1. Vikash Kumar Dubey, Proteomics & Genomics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Biosciences & Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102103017/ 

2. S. Ganesh, Functional Genomics, NPTEL Course Material, Indian Institute of Technology 

Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102104056/ 

3. Sanjeeva Srivastava,  Proteomics: Principles and Techniques, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Biosciences & Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102101007/6 

 

  



 

Title Biomaterials engineering Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Compulsory 

Prerequisite None   

Objective 

The Instructor will: 

1.  inspire future potential of bioengineering discipline 

2. provide cutting edge knowledge and applications of biomaterials in tissue engineering, drug 
delivery, biomechanics and reconstitution various biological events 

Learning Outcome 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

understand how biomaterials are useful for various biotechnological and bioengineering 
applications 
Contents 

Background and definition of biomaterials: classes of materials used biotechnological 
applications and in medicine: polymers, metals, ceramics, natural materials and composites, 
biodegradable polymers in medicine: polymers, liposomes, hydrogels, silicone biomaterials 
and medical fibers, degradation of materials in the biological environment, types of polymer 
degradation. Influence of polymer properties on degradation, influence of biological 
environment on polymer degradation (14 lectures) 

Surface engineering of biomaterials: biological testing of biomaterials: in vitro assessment of 
materials for tissue compatibility, in vivo assessment of tissue compatibility. Host reactions to 
biomaterials and their evaluations, the role of adsorbed proteins in tissue response to 
biomaterials. Cell, extra cellular matrix, and tissue interactions with biomaterials, 
inflammation, wound healing and foreign body response to biomaterials. Immune response to 
foreign materials. Toxicity, tumor genesis and biomaterials (14 lectures) 

Microscopes for monitoring biomaterials and their dynamics: tirf and confocal, applications in 
drug delivery and nanomedicine, bioengineering concept to reconstitute cell like micro-
chambers: flow-chambers and artificial cell, bioengineered platform for monitoring 
microtubule dynamics, bioengineered platform for monitoring microtubule motility and 
organization, bioengineered platform for monitoring microtubule force, reconstitution of 
kinesin transport using engineered biomaterials, applications in brain injury, repairing and 
future applications (14 lectures) 

Textbook 

Latest Research articles (ChemBioChem, Molecular Biosystem, AngewChem, ACS Chemical 
Biology, JACS, ChemComm, ACS Chemical Neuroscience etc.) 
Self Learning Material  

None 

Preparatory Course Material 

None 

  



 

Title Statistical Techniques, Advanced Statistical Number MAL7XX0 
Techniques 

MAL7XX0 

Department Mathematics  L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Compulsory  

Prerequisite Nil   

Objectives:  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide training in the analysis of the data from high dimensional biological data 

2. Familiarizing the participants with the use of statistical tools and methodologies for 
analysing biological data 

Learning outcomes: 

The students are expected to: 

1. Analyse data, be able to decide which data analysis tool to use 

2. Implement statistical methods on real datasets   

Contents 

MAL7XX1: Statistical Techniques [1-0-0] 

(fractal 1) probability models and sampling techniques, tests of hypotheses, stochastic process 
(14 lecture) 

MAL7XX0:  Advanced Statistical Techniques [2-0-0] 

(fractal 2) estimation, mixture models and latent models, association and correlation analysis, 
regression analysis (28 lectures) 

Textbook 

1. Casella,G. and Berger,R., (2002), Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning. 
2. Montogomery,D.C., Peck,E.A. and Vining,G.G., (2012), Introduction to Linear Regression 

Analysis, Wiley. 
3. Medenhall,W., Beaver,R.J., Beaver, B.M., (2013), Introduction to Probability and Statistics, 

Cengage Learning. 
 

Self Learning Material 

1. Rosner,B., (2000), Fundamentals of Biostatistics, 5th Edition, Thomson Brooks/Cole. 

2. Johnson,R.A., (2000), Probability and Statistics for Engineers, 6th Edition, Prentice Hall. 

3.DeGroot,M.H., Schervish, M.J., (2002), Probability and Statistics, 3rd Rev. Edition, Addison-
Wesley. 

Preparatory Course MaterialSen, S., Introduction to Biostatistics, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 

https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_bt21/preview 

 

  



Title Statistics and Data Analysis Lab Number BBP7XX0 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [2] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Compulsory  

Prerequisite Nil   

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide training in the analysis of the data from high dimensional biological data 

2. Familiarizing the participants with the use of statistical tools and methodologies for 
analysing biological data 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to: 

1. Analyse data, be able to decide which data analysis tool to use 

2. Learn the latest programming languages  

3. Implement statistical methods on real datasets   

Laboratory Experiments 

programming using pyspark/R, statistical modelling using real datasets, identification of 
biomarkers, application of ANOVA, genome-wide association analysis studies (linear and 
logistic regression), meta-analysis, population stratification techniques, survival analysis 

Textbook 

1. Casella,G. and Berger,R.L., (2002), Statistical Inference, 2nd Edition, Cengage Learning. 

2. Montogomery,D.C., Peck,E.A. and Vining,G.G., (2012), Introduction to Linear Regression 
Analysis, 4th Edition, Wiley. 

3. Medenhall,W., Beaver, R.J., Beaver, B.M., (2013), Introduction to Probability and Statistics, 
14th Edition, Cengage Learning. 

Self Learning Material 

1. Rosner, B., (2000), Fundamentals of Biostatistics, 5th Edition, Thomson Brooks/Cole. 

2. Johnson, R. A., (2000), Probability and Statistics for Engineers, 6th Edition, Prentice Hall. 

3. DeGroot, M. H., Schervish, M. J., (2002), Probability and Statistics, 3rd Rev. Edition, 
Addison-Wesley. 

Preparatory Course Material 

Sen, S., Introduction to Biostatistics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Biosciences and 
Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 

https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_bt21/preview 

 

  



Title Systems Biology Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 

Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year Type Compulsory 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide an introduction to cellular and level systems biology with an emphasis on 
mathematical 22nalyse22r, synthetic biology, 22nalyse22r of genetic networks, genetic 
and metabolic engineering, and thermodynamics.  

2. Cellular systems include genetic switches and oscillators, network motifs, genetic network 
evolution, and cellular decision-making.  

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Implement knowledge of important concepts related to the mathematical modelling of 
complex systems, especially metabolic networks, protein interaction networks and gene 
regulatory networks. 

2. To apply them to model the 22nalyse22r of biological systems as well as develop 
strategies for manipulating them. 

Contents  

BBL7XX1 Mathematical Modelling & Simulations [1-0-0]: (fractal 1)Introduction to 
Modelling in Biomedicine, ODE 22nalyse22r of biochemical networks and cell populations, 
Boolean 22nalyse22r of biochemical networks, Agent-based 22nalyse22r of cell populations 
ad tissues (14 lectures) 

BBL7XX2 Graph theory & Networks [1-0-0]: (fractal 2)Networks  and  graph  theory, 
Network Measure, Scale-free  networks, Biological  networks, Modularity (14 lectures) 

BBL7XX3 Genetic & Metabolic Engineering [1-0-0]: (fractal 3)Genetic Engineering, 
Metabolic Engineering (14 lectures) 

Laboratory 

Practical exercise of a mathematical model in the context of biological systems. 

Network visualization tools: Cytoscape and Gephi. 

Software packages: Boost, network, igraph for graph-theoretic computations 

Textbook 

1.Brian P. I., (2013) Mathematical Modeling in Systems Biology: An Introduction, MIT Press 

2.Newman M. E. J. (2010), Networks: An Introduction, Oxford University Press. 

3.Nesbeth D. N. (2016), Synthetic Biology Handbook, CRC Press. 

Self Learning Material 

1.Klipp E (2009) Systems biology : a textbook. Wiley-VCH 

 



 

2.Department of Biological Engineering, MIT, https://be.mit.edu/research-areas/systems-
biology 

Preparatory Course Material 

1. Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/noc/individual_course.php?id=noc18-bt22 

 

  



 

Title Biosensors Number BBL7XX1 

EEL7XX2 

 

Department Bioscience & Bio-engineering and Electrical L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Engineering 

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives 

The Instructor will:Provide background on biosensors, their types, fabrication, characterization, 
& applications. 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1.  Understand the design and working of various biosensors  

2.  to design a sensor based on the figures of meritContents  

BBL7XX1: Types of biosensors and their characterization [1-0-0] 

(fractal 1) Introduction to biosensors, their applications, importance & relevance in the field of 
healthcare, agriculture and environment monitoring (4 lectures) 

Basic principles and types of sensors: Protein/antibody-based sensors: surface chemistry. 
Electrochemical and optical sensors, Redox-enzyme, Optical methods: UV/Vis/IR, 
fluorescence, luminescence, fibre optics, surface plasmon resonance, and mass based 
sensors Analytical methods chromatography, spectrophotometry, electrochemical 
characterization (10 lectures) 

EEL7XX2: Micro-fabrication technologies, sensor signals, interfacing and read out 
electronics  [1-0-0] 

(fractal 2) Introduction to micro-system fabrication technologies: optical lithography, etching, 
metallization, CVD, LIGA, DRIE, micro-molding, surface and bulk micromachining and 
packaging. Case studies related to high aspect ratio structures e.g.    micro-channels, 
Microarrays, Micro-reactors, microfabricated PCR, lab on chip, Biosensor interfacing: sources of 
noise, interfacing circuitry and read out electronics  (14 Lectures) 

Textbook: 

1. Anthony, T., Isao, K., Wilson, G.S., (2017) Biosensors: Fundamentals and applications, 
Oxford University Press. 

Reference book: 

1. Benica, F-G., (2012) Chemical Sensors and Biosensors-Fundamentals and applications, 12th 
edition, John-Wiley & Sons Ltd. 

2. Tai-Ran Hsu, (2017),  MEMS & Microsystems Design and Manufacture, Indian Edition, Tata 
McGraw-Hill 
 

Self Learning Material 1.Dr. Mainak Das, Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering, IIT 
Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102104062/19 

1. Dr. K Uma Mahshwari, Sastra University https://nptel.ac.in/courses/118106019/ 
 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Program Elective Set 1 

 

Bioimaging & Health Informatics 

  



Title Fundamentals of Neuroscience  Number BBL7xx0 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective 

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1.Provide introduction to neuroanatomy for engineers and cognitive neuro anatomists 

2. Provide Hands-on training is provided in the fundamentals of neuroanatomist structures 
and functions. Understanding of which has diverse applications in disease diagnostics by 
imaging. 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: understand areas of application based 
on the understanding of neuroanatomist structures and their association in some diseases. 

Contents 

Why are we interested in the brain: Diseases of the nervous systems (14 lectures): 
Schizophrenia, Depression, Diseases of Neural Degeneration: Alzheimer’s, Senile 
Dementia of the Alzheimer’s Type, Diagnosed as memory loss with inability to 
complete activities of daily living, Macroanatomy: Degeneration of higher cortices, 
Microanatomy: Amyloid plaques and tangles, Lou Gehrig/ALS, diseases of the Basal 
Ganglia, Huntington’s, Parkinson’s, Plasticity and Disease, 

Diseases of Deafferentation (7lectures), Multiple Sclerosis, Phantom pain/central pain, 
Diseases of Vasculature, stroke, Migraine. Diseases and Neural Dynamics, Language 
Specific Learning Deficit, Association of Structure and Function, 

Cerebellar anatomy and its disorders (7lectures): motor disorders, Stumbling gate, 
psychiatric disorders, Pitch discrimination, language ability, Tactile perception, Deficits 
are not Trivially Localized, 

Deficits of NT systems (14 lectures): Depression, Schizophrenia, Phantom Limb, 
Alzheimer’s and the Brain 

Textbook 

1.  Kandel,E., (2012), Principles of Neural Science, 5th Edition, Elsevier 

2. Zigmond M (2012), Fundamental Neuroscience, 4th Edition Elsevier 

Reference Books 

1.   Lodish B, Kaiser K (2016), Molecular Cell Biology, 8th Edition, WH Freeman 
Online Course Material 

1. Constantine-Paton M, 9.013J / 7.68J Cell and Molecular Neurobiology, Spring 2008, MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons 

Title Digital Image Analysis Number CSL7XX0 



 

Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite None   

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce the origin and formation of digital imaging. 

2. Develop the understanding of different types of image processing and analysis for 
different purposes. 

3. Show how to develop modular systems for image analysis through hands-on application 
development. 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Enhance image in spatial and frequency domain. 

2. Implement various aspects of image segmentation, compression, and content analysis. 

Contents  

Digital Image Fundamentals: Image 27nalyse27r, Sampling and Quantization, Imaging 
Geometry,Digital Geometry, Image Acquisition Systems, Different types of digital images. (4) 

Bilevel Image Processing: Basic concepts of digital distances, distance transform, medial axis 
transform, component 27nalyse27r, Histogram of grey level images, Optimal thresholding. (5) 

Images Enhancement: Point processing, enhancement in spatial domain, enhancement in 
frequency domain. (5) 

Detection of edges and lines in 2D images: First order and second order edge operators,multi-
scale edge detection, Canny’s edge detection algorithm, Hough transform for detecting lines 
and curves. (5) 

Color Image Processing: Color Representation, Laws of color matching, chromaticity diagram, 
color enhancement, color image segmentation, color edge detection. (5) 

Image compression: Lossy and lossless compression schemes, prediction based compression 
schemes, vector quantization, sub-band encoding schemes, JPEG compression standard. (6) 

Segmentation: Segmentation of grey level images, Watershed algorithm for segmenting grey 
level image. (5) 

Morphology: Dilation, erosion, opening, closing, hit and miss transform, thinning, extension to 
grey scale morphology. (4) 

Feature Detection: Fourier descriptors, shape features, object matching/features(3) 

 

 

Textbook: 



1. Gonzalez and Woods, Digital Image Processing, Prentice-Hall. 

2. Fundamentals of Digital Image Processing by Anil K. Jain. 

Self Learning Material  

NPTEL: Digital Image Processing 

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105079/ 

 

  



 

Title Machine Learning-1 Number CSL7XX0 

 

Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory 

Prerequisite None   

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide motivation and understanding of the need and importance of Machine Learning in 
today’s world 

2. Provide details about various algorithms in Machine Learning 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Develop a sense of Machine Learning in the modern context, and independently work on 
problems relating to Machine Learning 

2. Design and program efficient algorithms related to Machine Learning, train models, 
conduct experiments, and deliver ML-based applications 

Contents  

CSL7XX1: Machine Learning I: Supervised Learning 1-0-0[1] 

Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic regression (2 
lectures) 

Gradient Descent: Introduction, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Subgradients, Stochastic 
Gradient Descent for risk minimization (2 lectures) 

Support Vector Machines: Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel trick, 
Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels (4 lectures) 

Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests (2 lectures) 

Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural networks, SGD and 
Backpropagation (3 lectures) 

Model selection and validation: Validation for model selection, k-fold cross-validation, Training-
Validation-Testing split, Regularized loss minimization (1 lectures) 

CSL7XX2: Machine Learning I: Unsupervised Learning and Generative Models 1-0-
0[1] 

Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality (1 lecture) 

Clustering: Linkage-based clustering algorithms, k-means algorithm, Spectral clustering (3 
lectures) 



 

Dimensionality reduction: Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, Compressed 
sensing (2 lectures) 

Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimator, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant Analysis, 
Latent variables and Expectation-maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning (5 lectures) 

Feature Selection and Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations, Feature learning 
(3 lectures) 

CSL7XX3: Machine Learning I: Computational Learning Theory and Deep Neural 
Networks 1-0-0[1] 

Statistical Learning Framework: PAC learning, Agnostic PAC learning, Bias-complexity tradeoff, 
No free lunch theorem, VC dimension, Structural risk minimization, Adaboost (7 lectures) 

Foundations of Deep Learning: DNN, CNN, RNN, Autoencoders (7 lectures) 

Textbook: 

1. Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben-David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory 
to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press 

Reference Books: 

2. Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill 
Self Learning Material  

3. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, 
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Title Image Sensor Design and Applications Number EEL7XX0 

 

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech. IV, M. Tech, Ph.D. Type Elective 

Prerequisite Analog electronics   

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce the design and analysis of CMOS image sensors. 

2. Explain the readout electronics behind the camera. 

3. Provide the knowledge of performance measures and tradeoffs involved in the camera 
design. 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Design and develop CMOS image sensor including the sensing mechanism and signal chain 
of the camera. 

2. Implement different techniques required for high dynamic range camera, high frame rate, 
low noise camera, time of flight 3D cameras etc. 

Contents  

Introduction to photodetectors: Photodiode and photogate, photocurrent, dark current, 
quantum efficiency, spectral response and photo-conversion principles (5 Lectures). 

Introduction to Charge coupled devices and CMOS image sensors: Operation, performance 
metrics, noise and its types, spatial resolution and modulation transfer function. Concept of 
exposure triangle including aperture, shutter speed and ISO, color filters, Bayer pattern, 
Shutters and its types, motion blur, hard and soft reset, Introduction to imaging optics (8 
Lectures). 

Readout electronics and image sensor characterization: Readout and its types, design tradeoffs 
and challenges, analysis of the signal path behind the camera, variable gain amplifiers, double 
sampling circuits, ADCs, reference circuits including BGR and LDO, clock generation circuits 
including PLL and delay elements, floor planning, placement and routing, image sensor 
characterization. Introduction to wire bonding, packaging, lens and color filters for product 
level design (15 Lectures). 

Emerging trends: High speed cameras, high dynamic range cameras, 3D cameras for 
background light subtraction and depth estimation. Concepts of Polarization imaging, low light 
imaging, machine vision, backside illumination, stacked technology, target tracking (10 
Lectures). 

Color Processing: Color demosaicing, color correction and white balance (2 Lectures). 

Applications: Smart city,health care, autonomous vehicles, sports, motion detection, 
surveillance (2 Lectures). 

Textbook 

1. Jun Ohta, (2007), Smart CMOS Image sensors and Applications, CRC press. 
 
 



Self Learning Material 

1. O. Yadid Pecht and R. E. Cummings (2004), CMOS imagers: From Photo transduction to 
Image processing, Springer. 

2. Image sensors blog http://image-sensors-world.blogspot.com/ 

Preparatory Course Material  

1. El Gamal, Abbas, and Helmy Eltoukhy (2005) “CMOS image sensors.” IEEE Circuits and 
Devices Magazine vol. 21, no. 3, pages 6-20.  

2. Fossum, Eric R. (1997) “CMOS image sensors: Electronic camera-on-a-chip.” IEEE 
transactions on electron devices vol. 44. No. 10, pages 1689-1698. 

 

  



 

Title Introduction to Medical Physics Number PHL7XX0 

 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The instructor will 

1. Introduce physics concepts and principles relevant for medicine and health 2. Provide the 
introduction of modern diagnostic tools and various technology to medical research and to 
the healthcare arena in general that is set to revolutionize the way we cure diseases. 
 

Learning Outcomes  

Aspects of physics with engineering for biological applications 

1. Contribution of physics in the development of medical diagnostics 
 

Contents  

PH7XX1 (Radiological imaging techniques) [1-0-0] 

(a) Physics in Medical research: Interaction of radiation with matter, Interaction of photons 
with tissues, molecules, cells and organs, Elastic and inelastic scattering, Thomson and 

Compton Scattering. (6 lectures) 

1. Radiological imaging: X-ray imaging and computerized Tomography (CT), Radioisotope 
imaging, Positron–emission Tomography, Introduction to the image analysis. (8 lectures) 

PH7XX3 (Physics in Therapeutics) [1-0-0] (a) Plasma for Medicine: Introduction of low 
temperature plasma technology to medical research, plasma chemistry, fundamentals of non-
equilibrium plasmas and cell biology. Cold plasma applications in the inactivation of pathogens, 
anti-bacterial coatings, wound healing, electrosurgery, cancer treatment and dentistry. (10 
lectures) (b) Nuclear Medicine: Radioactivity, Production of radionuclides, Radiation therapy for 
cancer treatment. (4 lectures) 

Textbook 

1. Cho, Z-H., Jones, J. and Singh, M., Foundations of Medical Imaging, 1st Edition Wiley 
Interscience, 1993 

2. Pryma, D. A., Nuclear Medicine, 1st Edition, Oxford University Press, 2015 

3. Murphy, D. B. and Davidson, M. W., Fundamental of Light Microscopy and Electronic 
Imaging, 2nd Edition, Wiley-Blackwell, 2012 

Reference Books 

1. Toyokuni, S., Ikehara, Y., Kikkawa, F. and Hori, M. (2018), Plasma Medical Science, 1st 
Edition, Academic Press. 
 

Self-Learning Material 

1. Department of Electrical Engg, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105091/ 



2. Jasanoff, A., MIT Open courseware, Noninvasive Imaging in Biology and Medicine, 

https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/nuclear-engineering/22-56j-noninvasive-imaging-in-
biology-and 

medicine-fall-2005/index.htm. 

Preparatory Course Material 

1. Department of Physics, IIT Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115102017/. 
 

 

  



Title Principles of Drug Discovery Number BBL7XX1 

CSL7XX1 

CSL7XX2 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering and Computer L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [2] 
Science and engineering 

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite None   

 

Objective 

The Instructor will: 

1. focus on route of drug design and discovery 
 

Learning Outcome 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. understand the principles of drug design and development 
 

Contents 

BBL7XX1: Principles of Drug Discovery [1-0-0] 

(fractal 1)drug targets, pharmacokinetics, administration and dosing, drug testing: in vivo and 
in vitro, drug discovery: natural lead, synthetic lead, combinatorial synthesis, 
pharmacokinetics based drug design, chemical development, process development, toxicology, 
pharmacology, drug metabolism, clinical trials, commercialization (14 lectures) 

CSL7XX0: Machine Learning-1 [2-0-0] 

(fractal 2) introduction, gradient descent, support vector machines, decision trees, neural 
networks (14 lectures) 

(fractal 3) nearest neighbour, clustering, dimensionality reduction, generative models, feature 
selection and generation (14 lectures) 

Textbook 

1. Stromgaard,K., Krogsgaard-Larsen,P., Madsen,U., Drug Design and Discovery, 5th Edition, 
CRC Press  

 

Self-Learning Material  

1. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 

Preparatory Course Material 

 

 

 

 



Title Introductory Chemical Biology Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite None   

 

Objective 

The Instructor will: 

1. Build fundamental concept of interdisciplinary science, specially chemical biology 
 

Learning Outcome 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understand the importance of interdisciplinary sciences and its applications in 
bioengineering fields 
 

Contents 

Introduction: background and definition of chemical biology, overview of chemical 
biology, allied fields and their link with chemical biology, overview of protein structure 
and protein-protein interactions (14 lectures) 

Biomolecular-drug interaction: key discoveries in the field of chemical biology, few 
examples and journey through those discoveries, the use of unusual amino acids to 
probe biomolecular conformation, the use of novel fluorescence probe and 
applications, sirna as therapeutics, small molecule kinase inhibitors, gtp analogues as 
potential regulators for microtubule dynamics (14 lectures) 

Imaging: applications of small molecule as a probe for in vivo imaging, chemical tools 
for perturbation of protein-protein interactions, chemical platforms for protein-protein 
and protein-nucleic acid interactions (14 lectures) 

Textbook 

1. Chemical Biology: From Small Molecules to Systems Biology and Drug Design 
(Willey), Editor(s): Profs. Stuart L. Schreiber, Tarun M. Kapoor and Günther Wess 

Nature Chemical Biology, 2010, 6, 847-853 

Self Learning Material  

None 

Preparatory Course Material 

None 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Program Elective Set 2 

 

Multi-’Omics’ 

 

  



Title Omics Databases Number BBL 7XX0 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 

Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce the biological databases commonly encountered in omics research and will 
highlight how different data types are used across biology 
 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Store / retrieve biological data in / from relevant databases and process it for analyses 
 

Contents 

Biological Databases: Sequence databases, gene expression databases, sequence read 
archives, peptide databases, metabolite libraries, phenomic databases, data file formats, 
conversion between formats, considerations for data submission to databases, 
considerations for using data retrieved from databases, data quality control, [data 
warehousing and integration, anonymizing data*] (14 lectures) 

Textbook 

1. Byron K., Herbert K.G., Wang J.T.L, (2016), Bioinformatics Database Systems, CRC Press 

2.  Srivastava C., (2019), Informatics in Proteomics, CRC Press 

Reference Books 

1. Bergeron B., (2016), Bioinformatics Computing, Pearson 
 

Self-Learning Material 

None 

*Will be covered by CSE Department 

 

  



Title Introduction of Data Science  Number MAL7XX0 

Department Mathematics L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 

Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce the basics of data science and its underlying concepts. 

2. Introduce data processing, manipulation and cleaning techniques. 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Acquire familiarity with the basic concepts of data science. 

2. Distinguish between different kinds of data and data governance. 

3. Understand the preparation and processing of the data. 

 

Contents [14 Lectures] Data preparation, Data pre-processing, Data Cleaning, Data 
Integration, Data Transformation, Data Reduction, Redundancy Removal, Data storage, 
Data Handling, Querying Data, Data Representation and Exploration, Big Data. 

Text Books 

1. Kotu, V. and Deshpande, B. (2018) Data Science: Concepts and Practice, Morgan 
Kaufmann. 

2. Saltz, J.S. and Stanton, J.M. (2017) An Introduction to Data Science, SAGE 
Publications. 

3. Kelleher, J.D., and Tierney, B. (2018) Data Science, MIT Press. 

Reference Books 

1. Moreira, J., Carvalho, A. and Horvath, T. (2018) A General Introduction to Data 
Analytics, John Wiley & Sons. 

2. Mayer-Schonberger, V. and Cukier, K., (2013) Big data: The essential guide to work, 
life and learning in the age of insight, John Murray Publications. 

Online course Material 

Not Available 

 

  



Title Data Management (Fractal of Software and Number CSL7XX2 
Data Engineering) 

Department CSE L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 

Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Discuss techniques to manage a large amount of data 
 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Design complex end-to-end data pipeline for data processing 

2. Critically identify and use the tools for data handling and management 

Contents 

CSL7XX2 Data Management 1-0-0 [1] 

Data Management: Structured data, relational database management, unstructured data, 
semi-structured data, Nosql database management (mongodb), column database, graph 
database, XML, JSON, HDFS, Handling drift in data, sensor data reliability at software and 
algorithmic level, sensor data analysis techniques (14 lectures) 

Textbook 

1. Bass L., Clements P., Kazman R., (2012), Software Architecture in Practice, 3rd edition, 
Addison-Wesley Professional 

2. Martin K., (2017), Designing Data-Intensive Applications: The Big Ideas Behind 
Reliable, Scalable, and Maintainable Systems, 1st Edition, O’Reilly Media 

Self Learning Material 

1. Tylor,R.N., Medvidovic,N. and Dashofy,E.M., (2014), Software Architecture Foundation: 
Theory and Practice, Wiley 

2.  
Preparatory Course Material 

1. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 

2. International Conference on Data Engineering 

 

  



Title Microarray Data Analysis Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 

Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide background to 41nalyse microarray technology/RNA sequencing gene expression 
data. 

2. Familiarize the students with the use of advanced tools and methodologies for 
41nalyse41r microarray/RNA seq expression data 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understand the structure of the data, the statistical procedures used to remove the 
inherent noise present in the data (pre-processing of the data) 

2. Decide which data analysis tool to use 

Contents 

DNA Microarray: Gene expression biology, DNA microarrays and their importance, types 
of microarrays- two-channel cDNA arrays, single-channel Affymetrix genechips, 
microarray platforms, Designing a microarray experiment-The basic steps 

Microarray Databases: NCBI and microarray data management, GEO (Gene Expression 
Omnibus), Array Express, The benefits of GEO and Array Express. 

Microarray Data Normalization: Importance of microarray data pre-processing, 
Background correction, Data normalization, Measuring dissimilarity of expression pattern 
using dissimilarity measures 

Microarray Data Analysis: Identification of differentially expressed genes- using statistical 
and computational approaches, Classifying samples from two populations using k-nearest 
41nalyse41r classifier, Support Vector Machines and their applications, For grouping co-
expressed genes- Kmeans Clustering, Hierarchical Clustering. 

Visualization and Functional Analysis: Bio-molecular pathways, gene ontology, enrichment 
analysis, hypergeometric distribution, calculation of P-Value, hypothesis testing, multiple 
hypothesis testing 

Textbook 

1. Draghici, S., (2012), Statistics and Data Analysis for Microarrays Using R and 
Bioconductor, 2nd Edition, Chapman & Hal/CRC. 
 

Reference Books 

1. Knudsen, S., (2004), Guide to Analysis of DNA Microarray Data, John Wiley & Sons. 

2.  Stekel, D., (2002), Microarray Bioinformatics, Cambridge University Press. 

3. Draghic, S., (2002), Data Analysis tools for DNA Microarray, Chapman and Hall/CRC 
Press. 



Online Course Material 

1.  Srivastava, S., Microarray Data Analysis, Department of Bioscience and 
Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102101054/35 

  



 

Title RNA Sequencing Data Analysis Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2-0-0 [2] 

Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective  

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Illustrate the intricacies involved in choosing the right RNA sequencing platform and will 
highlight the key steps of data analysis  

 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Analyse an RNA sequencing dataset and draw biological meaning from the data 
 

Contents  

Introduction to RNA Sequencing Data: Sequencing chemistries, choosing the right method 
for an application, principal considerations while designing an RNA sequencing experiment  

Quality Control: Sequence quality scores, pre-processing steps & considerations, FastQC, 
filtering & trimming of low-quality reads, detecting contaminants, removing adapters, red 
flags & troubleshooting 

Reference mapping: Alignment tools, assessment of alignment statistics, manipulating 
alignments, visualizing alignments 

De novo assembly: Transcriptome reconstruction & inherent complexities, pre-processing 
considerations for de novo assembly, de Bruijn graph, assembly tools, R & bioconductor for 
data analysis 

Gene expression analysis: Annotation, counting reads per transcript, differential gene 
expression, importance of biological & technical replicates, count distributions, 
normalization, visualizing differential gene expression, graphics & plot types 

Detecting Non-coding RNAs: Methods for detecting non-coding RNAs, sRNAs, miRNAs, 
piRNAs, endo-siRNAs, exo-siRNAs, snoRNAs, snRNAs 

Applications of RNA sequencing: Transcriptome response profiling, finding splice variants, 
detecting allele specific expression in disease 

Textbook  

1.  Korpelainen E., Tuimala J., Somervuo P., Huss M., Wong G., (2015), RNA-Seq Data 
Analysis: A Practical Approach, CRC Press 

2.  Wang X., (2016), Next-Generation Sequencing Data Analysis, CRC Press 

Reference Books  

Review & research articles as prescribed by the Instructor 

Self-learning Material None 

  



Title Algorithms in Biology Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite Nil   

 

Objectives:  

1. To  develop  an  understanding of  the  main  algorithmic  approaches  used  in  solving 
computational problems that arise in the analysis of biomolecular data (such as 
DNA/RNA/amino acid sequences, mass spectra of proteins, whole genomes, or gene 
expression levels). 
 

Learning outcomes:  

The students are expected to: 

1.  Understand various algorithms related to biological data analysis.  

2.  Develop new efficient algorithm to solve biological data.    

Contents 

Algorithms and Complexity: What is an algorithm?, Biological Algorithm versus Computer 
Algorithms, The change problem, Correct versus Incorrect Algorithms, Recursive 
Algorithms, Iterative versus Recursive Algorithms, Fast vs Slow Algorithms, Big-O 
Notation, Algorithm Design Techniques, Tractable versus Intractable Problems (10 
lectures) 

Greedy Algorithms: Genome Rearrangements, Sorting by Reversals, Approximation 
Algorithms, Breakpoint: A different face of greed, A greedy approach to motif finding (10 
lectures) 

Dynamic programming algorithms: The power of DNA sequence comparison, the change 
problem revisited, the manhattan tourist problem, edit distance and alignments, longest 
common subsequences, global sequence alignment, local sequence alignment, alignment 
and gap penalties, multiple alignment, gene prediction. (10 lectures) 

Clustering and Trees:  Gene expression analysis, Hierarchical Clustering, k-means 
clustering, clustering and corrupted cliques, evolutionary trees, distance based tree 
reconstruction, Evolutionary trees and hierarchical clustering, small parsimony problem, 
large parsimony problem (7 lectures) 

Gene selection algorithms: SAM, eBayes, Limma, CFS, mRMR, MRMS [5 lectures] 

Textbook 

1. Jones N. C. ,Pevzner  P. A.  (2014), An Introduction to Bioinformatics Algorithms, MIT 
Press 

Reference Books 

1. Mitra S. and Acharya T. (2003), Data Mining: Multimedia, Soft Computing, and 
Bioinformatics, New York: John Wiley 

2.  Mitra S., Datta S., Perkins T. and Michailidis G. (2008), Introduction to Machine Learning 
and Bioinformatics, New York: Chapman & Hall/CRC Press. 

Online Course Material : None 

 



Title Proteomics Data Analysis Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [0] 

Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce the biological databases commonly encountered in omics research and will 
highlight how different data types are used across biology 
 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Store / retrieve biological data in / from relevant databases and process it for analyses 
 

Contents 

Mass spectrometry for proteomics: Basic principles, ionization methods, mass analyzers & 
mass spectrometers, analysis of MS data, analysis of MS/MS data, simple vs complex 
samples (18 lectures) 

Case studies: Qualitative proteomics, differential proteomics, detecting post-translational 
modifications, interactomics (10 lectures) 

Textbook 

1. Lovric, J., (2011), Introducing Proteomics: From Concepts to Sample Separation, Mass 
Spectrometry and Data Analysis. 11th Edition, Wiley-Blackwell. 
 

Reference Books 

1.  Twyman R., (2013), Principles of Proteomics, 2nd Edition, CRC Press 

2.  Conn P.M., [Ed.] (2003), Handbook of Proteomic Methods, Springer 

Online Course Material 

1. Sanjeeva Srivastava,  Proteomics: Principles and Techniques, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Biosciences & Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102101007/6  

 

  



 

Title Microbial Genomes & Microbiomes Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective 

 
Prerequisite   

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Illustrate the various methods applicable in the generation, analysis and interpretation of 
microbial genome sequencing data 

2. Outline the methods involved in determining the microbiome and assessing its importance 
in health, environment and agriculture 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Determine the best possible methods to determine the sequence of bacterial genomes 
with naturally varying properties. 

2. Be acquainted with the microbiomes associated with specific niches, methods to study 
them and infer what it means to have a specific microbiome in a given environment 

Contents 

Introduction to microbial genomes: Prokaryotic genome anatomy, Extrachromosomal 
elements, Separation (4 lectures) 

Genome sequencing: Timeline of DNA sequencing technologies, Explosive abundance of 
Genomic Data, Problems with genome assembly and solutions, Coding sequence 
prediction, Methods of gene prediction, Pathways and metabolic models (8 lectures) 

Functional & Comparative Genomics: Experimental annotation, Gene expression profiling, 
Interactome,Genome alignment, Genomic phylogeny, Pan-genomics (10 lectures) 

Genome evolution: Genomic islands, Genome plasticity, Resistome, Molecular epidemiology, 
Minimal genome concept, Synthetic genomes, Genomic alterations (10 lectures) 

Microbiomes: Introducing metagenomics, detecting unculturable microbes, the human 
microbiome project, 16S based microbiome analysis, metagenome shotgun sequencing, 
importance of the microbiome in health, applications of microbiome sequencing in 
agriculture & the environment 

Textbook 

1.  Brown T.A. (2007) Genomes 3, Blackwell publications 

2. Fraser C.M., Read T.D., Nelson K.E., (2004), Microbial Genomes, Humana Press 

Reference Books 

2. Review & Research articles as prescribed by the Instructor 
 
Online Course Material Ganesh S., Functional Genomics, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Biological Sciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology, 
Kanpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102104056/ 

 



Title Metabolomics Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [1] 

Offered for M.Tech. Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce metabolomics as a discipline highlighting some methods for data generation, 
analysis and interpretation 
 
Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Choose the appropriate method to qualitatively or quantitatively analyze the metabolome 
from different biological samples 
 

Contents 

Metabolomics Technologies & Data analysis [14 lectures]: Mass spectrometry for metabolite 
profiling, liquid & gas chromatography separation technologies; capillary electrophoresis 
based separation technology; nuclear magnetic resonance in profiling; single cell 
metabolomics, processing of data for analysis, statistical analysis, lifestyle disease 
biomarker identification, lipidomics 

Applications: Clinical samples, extraction methods, sample preparation, metabolic markers of 
disease, comparative metabolomics, metabonomics 

Textbook 

1. Fan T.W.M., Lane A.N., Higashi R.M., [Eds], (2012), The Handbook of Metabolomics, 
Springer 
 

Reference Books 

2. Sussulini A., [Ed] (2017), Metabolomics: From Fundamentals to Clinical Applications, 
Springer 
 

Online Course Material 

None 

  



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Program Elective Set 3 

 

Biological Systems & Biosensors 

 

  



Title Experimental design for biologists Number BBN7XX0 

Department Bioscience and BioEngineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Compulsory  

Prerequisite Nil   

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide an understanding of the philosophy of experimentation and the steps involved in 
experiment design and validation.  

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

2. Design experiments, validate and test models.    
Contents 

Philosophy of Experimentation:The Philosophy of Science Governs the Practice of Science, 
Defining Scientific Research, Why Do Science? What Is Science For? The Need for Inductive 
Reasoning, The First Step: Establishing Your Framework, A Short History of Philosophy Relevant 
to Scientific Method, the Problem of Induction, Examining the Hypothesis-Falsification 
Framework, Hypothesis as a Framework for Scientific Projects, Scientific Settings in Which a 
Hypothesis-Falsification Framework Is Not Feasible, The Question and the Model: Forming an 
Inductive Framework for Scientific Projects (9 Lectures) 

System Validation:The System, System Validation, Choice of a Model Organism or 
Technique: 

Validation Experiments, System Validation Requirements for Distinct Experimental 
Readouts, 

System Specificity: Specificity of Detection and Specificity of Perturbation, System 
Sensitivity: 

Minimizing Signal to Noise to Improve Sensitivity of Detection, System Stability, 
Determining 

Conditions to Measure Efficacy, System Validation: Determining Conditions to Measure 
Safety 

(9 Lectures) 

The ExperimentDefinition of the Experiment: The Framework for an Individual Experiment, The 
Negative Control: Distinct Types, The Requirement for the Positive Control, Method and 
Reagent Controls, Subject Controls, Assumption Controls, Experimentalist Controls: 
Establishing a Claim to an Objective Perspective, Biological Replicates, Technical Replicates, 
Experimental Repeats, Time Courses, and Dose Responses, Summary of Components of 
Individual Experiment (9 Lectures) 

The ModelBuilding: the Model: Representations of the Experimental Data, Data Filtration, 

Model induction: Asking Follow-Up Questions and Finishing the Project by Writing the 

Manuscript, A Short Synopsis. (5 Lectures) 



 

Designing the Experimental Project: A Biological Example (10 Lectures) 

Textbook  

1.Glass D.J., Experimental Design for Biologists, 2ndEdition, Novartis Institutes for 
Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts 

2.Barker K., At the Bench: A Laboratory Navigator, Updated Edition, The Institute for 
Systems Biology, Seattle   

Reference Books  

1. Adams D. S., Lab Math: A Handbook of Measurements, Calculations, and Other Quantitative 
Skills for Use at the Bench, 2nd edition, The Tufts Center for Regenerative and 
Developmental Biology and Department of Biology, Tufts University 
 

Online Course Material  

1. Biology course, https://courses.ibiology.org/courses/course-v1:iBiology 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Title Disease, Processes, Diagnostics & Number BBL7XX0 
Therapeutics 

Department Bioscience and BioEngineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Compulsory  

Prerequisite Nil   

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Introduction to fundamentals of immunology, clinical immunology, Diagnostics and 
therapeutics  
 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Ability to understand immunological processes and 51nalyse diagnostics  
 

Contents 

Immunology – Fundamental Concepts and Anatomy of Immune 
System:Components of innate and acquired immunity; Complement and 
Inflammatory responses; Organs and cells of the immune system- primary and 
secondary lymphoid organs; Lymphatic system; MHC, Immune Responses 
Generated by B and T Lymphocytes, Immunoglobulins-basic structure, classes and 
subclasses, antigenic determinants; Organization of immunoglobulin genes; VDJ 
Recombination, Principles of cell 51nalyse51ry; Immunological basis of self –non-
self discrimination; Kinetics and memory; B and T cell maturation, activation and 
differentiation into Subsets, Antigen-Antibody Interactions, Precipitation, 
agglutination and complement mediated immune reactions; Advanced 
immunological techniques – RIA, ELISA, Western blotting, ELISPOT assay, 
immunofluorescence, flow cytometry; Biosensor assay (13Lectures) 

Clinical Immunology:  Immunity to Infection : Bacteria, viral, fungal and parasitic 
infections (with examples from each group); Hypersensitivity – Type I-IV; 
Autoimmunity; Types of autoimmune diseases; Mechanism and role of CD4+ T 
cells; MHC and TCR in autoimmunity; Treatment of autoimmune diseases; 
Transplantation – Immunological basis of graft rejection; Clinical transplantation 
and immunosuppressive therapy Tumor immunology :Tumor antigens; Immune 
response to tumors and tumor evasion of the immune system, Cancer 
Immunotherapy, Immunodeficiency-Primary immunodeficiencies, Acquired or 
secondary immunodeficiencies, case studies (16 Lectures) 

Vaccines and Drug Therapy(13 Lectures) Active and passive immunization; Live, 
killed, attenuated, sub unit vaccines; Vaccine technology- Role and properties of 
adjuvants, recombinant DNA and protein based vaccines, plant-based vaccines, 
reverse vaccinology; Peptide vaccines, conjugate vaccines; Antibody genes and 
antibody engineering- chimeric and hybrid monoclonal antibodies; Catalytic 
antibodies and generation of immunoglobulin gene libraries (13 Lectures) 

 

Textbook  



1. Janeway,C (1996), Immunobiology, 4th EditionGarland Publishing 
 

Reference Books  

2. R,A, Goldsby., Thomas, J.K., and Barbara, A, Osborne. (2002), Kuby Immunology, 6th 
Edition Freeman  
 

Self-learning Material  

1. Manjunath R., Nandi D, Karande A, Essentials in Immunology, Indian Institute of Science 
Bangalore,  http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104108055/, NPTEL Course Material. 

2. Kumar S, Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102103038/,NPTEL Course Material. 

 

  



Title Cardiovascular Physiology:  Signals, systems and Number BBLXX0 
controls  

Department Bioscience and BioEngineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0  

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective 

Prerequisite Nil   

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1.  Provide an understanding of the hierarchical organization of Chemical and electrical signals 
and Control Mechanisms including Feed-back loops and switches for controlling Energy, 
Mechanics, Flow and Transport.  

2. Provide an understanding of the workings of the human body in context of engineering 
principles so as to develop an interdisciplinary outlook to biological as well as engineering 
problem-solving. 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1.Understand basic human physiology 

2.Analyze physiological systems from an engineering perspective 

3.Imagine engineering solutions that can solve biological problems OR can get inspired by 
biology to solve engineering problems.  

Contents 

CardiopulmonaryPhysiology (14lectures): Electricity in cardiac cells, Control of cardiac 
Automaticity, ECG, Cardiac and smooth muscle, Cardiovascular mechanics, and dynamics, 
Microcirculation control mechanisms, Cerebral and Pulmonary circulation: controls and 
switches, congestive heart failure, Shock, Breathing: forces, volume and flow, Resistance to 
Air flow, Alveolar gas exchange and transport, Acid-base balance, Neural control of 
Respiration.  

Textbook  

1. Joseph Feher., (2016), Quantitative Human Physiology, 2nd Edition, Academic Press  

2. E.N. Marieb (2006), Human Anatomy and Physiology, 6th Edition, Pearson Education 

Reference Books  

1. Boron W. F, Boulpaep E. L. Medical Physiology, 3rd Edition, Elsevier.  
 

Online Course Material  

1. Dennis Freeman, 6-021j Quantitative Physiology: Cells and Tissues, Fall 2004, MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 

2.Venegas, J, Mark, F. Quantitative Physiology: Organ Transport Systems, MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons BY-NC-SA  

 



Title Human Physiology Laboratory Number BBXXX 

Department Bioscience and BioEngineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Compulsory 

Prerequisite Nil   

 

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide an understanding of the hierarchical organization of Chemical and 
electrical signals and Control Mechanisms including Feed-back loops and 
switches for controlling Energy, Mechanics, Flow and Transport. 

2. Provide an understanding of the workings of the human body in context of 
engineering principles so as to develop an interdisciplinary outlook to biological 
as well as engineering problem-solving. 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1.Understand basic human physiology 

2.Analyze physiological systems from an engineering perspective 

3.Imagine engineering solutions that can solve biological problems OR can get 
inspired by biology to solve engineering problems. 

Contents 

Physiology of excitable Cells: Resting Membrane Potential, Modeling action 
potentials and 54nalyse54ry Conduction, Neuromuscular transmission, 
Introduction to Neurons in Action 

CardiopulmonaryPhysiology: bike ergometer with heart rate interface, peak flow 
meter and respiratory volumes, Muscle Function assessment 
(electromyography), health and fitness assessment using balance and mobility 
parameters. 

Stress and Exercise Physiology 

eye tracking, electro electroencephalography (EEG), verbal response (TA) and 
systematic observation using dedicated software (Morae) to measure cognitive load; 
use pupil dilation, galvanic skin response (GSR) 

Textbook 

1.  Joseph Feher., (2016), Quantitative Human Physiology, 2nd Edition, Academic 
Press 

2.  E.N. Marieb (2006), Human Anatomy and Physiology, 6th Edition, Pearson 
Education 

Reference Books 

1. Boron W. F, Boulpaep E. L. Medical Physiology, 3rd Edition, Elsevier. 



 
Online Course Material 

1.  Moore JW, Stuart A.E, Neurons in Action 2: Tutorials and Simulations in 
NEURON, Yale J Biol Med. 2008 Mar; 81(1): 50–51. 

  



Title Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience Number BBXXX 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 

Offered for B.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite Nil   

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1.  Provide introduction to the basic principles to understand how the brain works  

2. Provide an understanding of the structure and function of the Human brain in health and 
disease 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Integrate their understanding of structural and functional units of the human brain for 
design of health technologies  

 

Contents  

Introduction of Neuroscience [10 lectures]:Nervous systems, basic structure, development and 
complexity; senses and responses as essential components of life, Cellular units of the 
brain Neurons; types, structure and function, Glia, Maintenance of cellular homeostasis in 
the brain, the blood-brain barrier. 

Inter and Intracellular 56nalyse56ry[10 lectures]: Resting membrane potential, action 
potential and impulse propagation, importance of ion channels, microtubules organization, 
myelin sheath; secondary messengers, Neurotransmitters, classes, criteria for 
classification,the synapse, synaptic transmission, electrical and chemical synapses, synaptic 
integration of information, Neuromuscular junction, primary and secondary motor cortex, 
integration of sensory signals to motor actions, motor neuron diseases  

Sensory perception in health and disease [10 lectures]: sensory receptors; properties, 
sensitization and desensitization, sensory coding, Somatosensory System; organization, 
receptors (mechanoreceptors, proprioceptors, nociceptors, thermal receptors and Visceral 
sensations), Auditory sensory perception; structure of the internal ear, modulation of sound 
waves into nerve signal, integration within the auditory cortex, Visual pathways; 
organization, visual perception and processing, photoreceptors, processing and integration 
of visual information.   

Laboratory Experiments [12 laboratory sessions] 

Immunohistochemistry of the human brain, understanding distinct cellular populations and  
morphologies, Neuronal cell culture; neurons, microglia, astrocytes and endothelial cells, 
assessment of morphological changes with stress and disease, visualization of inter and 
intracellular cell 56nalyse56ry; cell migration, proliferation, secreted cytokines and 
chemokines.    

 



Textbook  

1. Kandel,E., (2012), Principles of Neural Science, 5th Edition, Elsevier  

2. Zigmond M (2012), Fundamental Neuroscience, 4th Edition Elsevier 

Reference Books  

1. Lodish B, Kaiser K (2016), Molecular Cell Biology, 8th Edition, WH Freeman 
 

Online Course Material  

1. Constantine-Paton M, 9.013J / 7.68J Cell and Molecular Neurobiology, Spring 2008, MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 

 

 

  



Title Sensory Neural Systems Number BBXXX 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech Type Elective 

Prerequisite Nil   

 

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide introduction to the basic principles to understand how the sensory neural 
pathways work 

2. Provide an understanding of the structure and function of the sensory neural 
pathways in health and disease 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Integrate their understanding of structural and functional units of the human brain for 
design of health technologies 
 

Contents 

BL6XX1 Synaptic communication: function and dysfunction [1-0-0]  [14 

  lectures]: sensory receptors; properties, sensitization and 

  desensitization, sensory coding, Somatosensory System; organization, 

  receptors (mechanoreceptors, proprioceptors, nociceptors, thermal receptors 

  and Visceral sensations),  Disorders of sensory perception. (1 fractal) 

 

BBL6XX2  Auditory perception: from cell to signal [1-0-0] [14lectures]: Auditory 

  sensory perception; structure of the internal ear, modulation of sound waves 

  into nerve signal, integration within the auditory cortex, (1fractal) 

 

BBL6XX1  Visual perception [1-0-0] [14lectures] Visual pathways; organization, visual 

  perception and processing, photoreceptors, processing and integration of 

  visual information. Disorders of visual perception (1fractal) 

Textbook 

1.  Kandel,E., (2012), Principles of Neural Science, 5th Edition, Elsevier 

2. Zigmond M (2012), Fundamental Neuroscience, 4th Edition Elsevier 

Reference Boo 



1. Lodish B, Kaiser K (2016), Molecular Cell Biology, 8th Edition, WH Freeman 
 

Online Course Material 

1. Constantine-Paton M, 9.013J / 7.68J Cell and Molecular Neurobiology, Spring 2008, MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 
 

 



Title Human Physiology Laboratory Number BBXXX 

Department Bioscience and BioEngineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Compulsory  

Prerequisite Nil   

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1.  Provide an understanding of the hierarchical organization of Chemical and electrical 
signals and Control Mechanisms including Feed-back loops and switches for controlling 
Energy, Mechanics, Flow and Transport.  

2. Provide an understanding of the workings of the human body in context of engineering 
principles so as to develop an interdisciplinary outlook to biological as well as engineering 
problem-solving. 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1.Understand basic human physiology 

2.Analyze physiological systems from an engineering perspective 

3.Imagine engineering solutions that can solve biological problems OR can get inspired by 
biology to solve engineering problems.  

Contents 

Physiology of excitable Cells: Resting Membrane Potential, Modeling action potentials and 
60nalyse60ry Conduction, Neuromuscular transmission, Introduction to Neurons in Action 

CardiopulmonaryPhysiology: bike ergometer with heart rate interface, peak flow meter and 
respiratory volumes, Muscle Function assessment (electromyography), health and fitness 
assessment using balance and mobility parameters. 

Stress and Exercise Physiology 

eye tracking, electro electroencephalography (EEG), verbal response (TA) and systematic 
observation using dedicated software (Morae) to measure cognitive load; use pupil dilation, 
galvanic skin response (GSR) 

Textbook  

1. Joseph Feher., (2016), Quantitative Human Physiology, 2nd Edition, Academic Press  

2. E.N. Marieb (2006), Human Anatomy and Physiology, 6th Edition, Pearson Education 

Reference Books  

1. Boron W. F, Boulpaep E. L. Medical Physiology, 3rd Edition, Elsevier.  
Online Course Material  

1. Moore JW, Stuart A.E, Neurons in Action 2: Tutorials and Simulations in NEURON, Yale J 
Biol Med. 2008 Mar; 81(1): 50–51. 

 

Title Quantitative Physiology: systems and controls of Number BBXXX 



the human machine  

Department Bioscience and BioEngineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Compulsory  

Prerequisite Nil   

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1.  Provide an understanding of the hierarchical organization of Chemical and electrical signals 
and Control Mechanisms including Feed-back loops and switches for controlling Energy, 
Mechanics, Flow and Transport.  

2. Provide an understanding of the workings of the human body in context of engineering 
principles so as to develop an interdisciplinary outlook to biological as well as engineering 
problem-solving. 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1.Understand basic human physiology 

2.Analyze physiological systems from an engineering perspective 

3.Imagine engineering solutions that can solve biological problems OR can get inspired by 
biology to solve engineering problems.  

Contents 

Physical and Chemical Foundations of Physiology: Homeostasis, energy balance, feedback 
control systems, pressure driven flow, Electrical Force, Potential, Capacitance, and Current, 
Electrochemical Potential and Free Energy, Membrane transport across a biological 
membrane. 

Physiology of excitable Cells: The Origin of the Resting Membrane Potential, GHK equation, 
action potentials, Membrane excitability, Modeling action potentials, 61nalyse61ry 
Conduction, Skeletal Muscle Mechanics, Neuromuscular transmission, Excitation–
Contraction Coupling Motor units, Size Principle, Concentric, Isometric, and Eccentric 
Contractions, Fatigue and Tetanus.  

CardiopulmonaryPhysiology: Electricity in cardiac cells, Control of cardiac Automaticity, ECG, 
Cardiac and smooth muscle, Cardiovascular mechanics, and dynamics, Microcirculation 
control mechanisms, Cerebral and Pulmonary circulation: controls and switches, congestive 
heart failure, Shock, Breathing: forces, volume and flow, Resistance to Air flow, Alveolar 
gas exchange and transport, Acid-base balance, Neural control of Respiration.  

Renal Physiology: Body fluid compartments and overview of renal function, Measurements of 
function and clearance, Glomerular filtration/Renal Hemodynamics, Tubular transport of 
electrolytes and water, Concentration and dilution of urine, Regulation of sodium balance, 
extracellular volume and Blood pressure, Renal mechanisms of hypertension.  

Textbook  



1. Joseph Feher., (2016), Quantitative Human Physiology, 2nd Edition, Academic Press  

2. E.N. Marieb (2006), Human Anatomy and Physiology, 6th Edition, Pearson Education 

Reference Books  

1. Boron W. F, Boulpaep E. L. Medical Physiology, 3rd Edition, Elsevier.  
 

Online Course Material  

1. Dennis Freeman, 6-021j Quantitative Physiology: Cells and Tissues, Fall 2004, MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 

2.Venegas, J, Mark, F. Quantitative Physiology: Organ Transport Systems, MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons BY-NC-SA  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Title Immunodiagnostics and therapeutics Number  



Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech. (MT) Program Type Elective  

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide an introduction to fundamentals techniques of clinical immunology and Immune 
based Diagnostics  

 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Immunology based diagnostics techniques for to create and 63nalyse diagnostics  
 

Contents  

Immunodiagnostics [14 lectures]: Selection of animals for immunological assays, Preparation 
of antigens, Immunization and methods of bleeding, Serum separation, Storage. Antibody 
titre by ELISA method. Double diffusion, Immuno-electrophoresis and Radial Immuno 
diffusion. Complement fixation test. Hybridoma technology and monoclonal antibody 
production. Lymphoproliferation by mitogen / antigen.  

Immunotherapeutics[14 lectures]: Active and passive immunization; Live, killed, attenuated, 
sub unit vaccines; Vaccine technology- Role and properties of adjuvants, recombinant DNA 
and protein based vaccines, plant-based vaccines, reverse vaccinology; Peptide vaccines, 
conjugate vaccines; Antibody genes and antibody engineering- chimeric and hybrid 
monoclonal antibodies; Catalytic antibodies and generation of immunoglobulin gene 
libraries 

Laboratory Experiments [12 experiments]: 

Immunoblotting for specific antigens, Dot blot assay, Blood smear identification of leucocytes 
by Giemsa stain. Quantification of Phagocytic activity, Separation of mononuclear cells by 
Ficoll-Hypaque. Immunohistochemistry (direct and indirect peroxidase assay), detection of 
Salmonella genus which causes enteric or Typhoid Fever by using qualitative slide agglutination 
test (Widal test), Detection of Treponemes responsible for veneral diseases such as  syphilis 
(VDRL) test, IgG Purification technique (Protein A Based, Spin Column)  

Textbook  

1. R.A. Goldsby., Thomas,J.K., and Barbara,A, Osborne., Kuby Immunology, Freeman,2002, 
6th Edition 

2. Stanier, R. Y., General Microbiology, W.H. Freeman and Co., 2009. 

3. Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E. C. S., Krieg, N.R., Microbiology, Tata McGraw – Hill Education, 2001 

 

Reference Books  



1. Murphy, K., Travers, P., Walport, M., & Janeway, C. (2012). Janeway’s Immunobiology. New 
York: Garland Science. 

3. Madigan, M.T.,  Martinko, J.M.,  Brock, Biology of Microorganisms, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 2006, 
11th  Edition. 

Online Course Material  

1 NPTEL Video Lectures on  Essentials in Immunology by Prof. R. Manjunath, Prof. Dipankar 
Nandi , Prof. Anjali Karande, Indian Institute of Science Bangalore  
(http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104108055/)  

2. NPTEL Video Lectures on Cellular and Molecular Immunology by Prof. Sachin Kumar, Indian 
Institute of Technology Guwahati  (http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102103038/)     

 

 

  



Title Sensory Neural Systems Number BBL7XX
0 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite Nil   

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1.  Provide introduction to the basic principles to understand how the sensory neural pathways 
work 

2. Provide an understanding of the structure and function of the sensory neural pathways in 
health and disease 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Integrate their understanding of structural and functional units of the human brain for 
design of health technologies  

 

Contents  

BBL7XX1 Synaptic communication: function and dysfunction [1-0-0]  [14 lectures]: sensory 
receptors; properties, sensitization and desensitization, sensory coding, Somatosensory 
System; organization, receptors (mechanoreceptors, proprioceptors, nociceptors, thermal 
receptors and Visceral sensations),  Disorders of sensory perception.  (1 fractal) 

BBL7XX2 Auditory perception: from cell to signal [1-0-0] [14lectures]: Auditory sensory 
perception; structure of the internal ear, modulation of sound waves into nerve signal, 
integration within the auditory cortex, (1fractal) 

BBL7XX1 Visual perception [1-0-0] [14lectures] Visual pathways; organization, visual 
perception and processing, photoreceptors, processing and integration of visual 
information. Disorders of visual perception (1fractal) 

Textbook  

1. Kandel,E., (2012), Principles of Neural Science, 5th Edition, Elsevier  

2. Zigmond M (2012), Fundamental Neuroscience, 4th Edition Elsevier 

Reference Books  

1. Lodish B, Kaiser K (2016), Molecular Cell Biology, 8th Edition, WH Freeman 
 

Online Course Material  

1. Constantine-Paton M, 9.013J / 7.68J Cell and Molecular Neurobiology, Spring 2008, MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 

 

 

  



Title Synaptic communication: function and Number BBL6XX3 
dysfunction  

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 

Offered for B.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite Nil   

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1.  Provide introduction to the basic principles to understand how synaptic communication 
works  

2. Provide an understanding of Synaptic function in health and disease 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Integrate their understanding of structural and functional units of the human brain for 
design of health technologies  

 

Contents  

     Synpatic structure: function and dysfunction (1 fractal) Resting membrane potential, action 
potential and impulse propagation, importance of ion channels, secondary messengers, 
Neurotransmitters, classes, criteria for classification,the synapse, synaptic transmission, 
electrical and chemical synapses, synaptic integration of information, Neuromuscular 
junction, primary and secondary motor cortex, integration of sensory signals to motor 
actions, motor neuron diseases [14lectures].   

Textbook  

1. Kandel,E., (2012), Principles of Neural Science, 5th Edition, Elsevier  

2. Zigmond M (2012), Fundamental Neuroscience, 4th Edition Elsevier 

 

Reference Books  

1. Lodish B, Kaiser K (2016), Molecular Cell Biology, 8th Edition, WH Freeman 
 

Online Course Material  

1. Constantine-Paton M, 9.013J / 7.68J Cell and Molecular Neurobiology, Spring 2008, MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 

 

 

  



 

Title Cell and Molecular Biology  Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [D] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year Type Elective   

Prerequisite Nil   

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. offer both basic as well as advanced knowledge of cell biology and molecular biology, 
mechanisms and progress fundamental conceptual base for scientific research understanding 
 

Learning Outcomes  

The students will have an ability to 

1. Fundamental comprehensive knowledge of cellular and molecular biology mechanisms and their 
regulation to understand advances and implications in health associated biotechnology 
Contents  

Introduction to Cell and Molecular Biology: Structure and functions of cell-organelles; Cell 
membrane physiochemical properties; Molecular Organization, biogenesis and functions of cell 
membrane; Eukaryotic chromosomes (Lectures-10) 

Cell Reproduction: Introduction to cell division; Biological principles of Mitosis and Meiosis; 
Difference and comparison of cell division among prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms; 
Cytokines; Regulation of cell division; Cancer and cell cycle deregulation (Lectures-12) 

Cell Death and Diseases:  Apoptosis: Phases and significance, Morphological and Biochemical 
changes associated With apoptotic cells, Apoptotic Pathways and regulators; Molecular 
genetics and diseases associated with cell death (Lectures-10) 

Mechanisms of Molecular Biology: Prokaryotic & Eukaryotic Transcription; Transcription unit; 
Transcript processing; Processing of RNA Eukaryotic transcription; RNA polymerase; Eukaryotic 
promoters and enhancers (Lectures-10) 

Textbook  

1. Bruce Alberts, (2014), Molecular Biology of the cell, 6th Edition, Garland Science  

2. Lodish., and W.H Freeman, (2016), Molecular Cell Biology, 8th Edition,  Macmillan learning  

3. Gerald Karp and Nancy L Pruitt, (2016), Cell and Molecular Biology, John 8th Edition Wiley and 
Sons 

Self-Learning Material 

1. D. Karunagaran, Molecular Cell Biology, Department of Biotechnology Indian Institute of 
Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/102106025/ 

Preparatory Course Material  

1. NPTEL Lectures:  on Molecular Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Technology Madras,  
http://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/102106025/ 

 

 



Title Immunodiagnostics and therapeutics Number  BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech. (MT) Program Type Elective 

 

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide an introduction to fundamentals techniques of clinical immunology and Immune 
based Diagnostics 
 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Immunology based diagnostics techniques for to create and 68nalyse diagnostics 
Contents 

Immunodiagnostics [14 lectures]: Selection of animals for immunological assays, 
Preparation of antigens, Immunization and methods of bleeding, Serum separation, 
Storage. Antibody titre by ELISA method. Double diffusion, Immuno-electrophoresis 
and Radial Immuno diffusion. Complement fixation test. Hybridoma technology and 
monoclonal antibody production. Lymphoproliferation by mitogen / antigen. 

Immunotherapeutics[14 lectures]: Active and passive immunization; Live, killed, 
attenuated, sub unit vaccines; Vaccine technology- Role and properties of adjuvants, 
recombinant DNA and protein based vaccines, plant-based vaccines, reverse 
vaccinology; Peptide vaccines, conjugate vaccines; Antibody genes and antibody 
engineering- chimeric and hybrid monoclonal antibodies; Catalytic antibodies and 
generation of immunoglobulin gene libraries 

Laboratory Experiments [12 experiments]: 

Immunoblotting for specific antigens, Dot blot assay, Blood smear identification of leucocytes 
by Giemsa stain. Quantification of Phagocytic activity, Separation of mononuclear cells by 
Ficoll-Hypaque. Immunohistochemistry (direct and indirect peroxidase assay), detection of 
Salmonella genus which causes enteric or Typhoid Fever by using qualitative slide 
agglutination test (Widal test), Detection of Treponemes responsible for veneral diseases such 
as  syphilis (VDRL) test, IgG Purification technique (Protein A Based, Spin Column) 

 Textbook 

1.  R.A. Goldsby., Thomas,J.K., and Barbara,A, Osborne., Kuby Immunology, 
Freeman,2002, 6th Edition 

2. Stanier, R. Y., General Microbiology, W.H. Freeman and Co., 2009. 

3. Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E. C. S., Krieg, N.R., Microbiology, Tata McGraw – Hill Education,  

2001 



 

Reference Books 

1. Murphy, K., Travers, P., Walport, M., & Janeway, C. (2012). Janeway’s Immunobiology. 
New York: Garland Science. 

2. Madigan, M.T.,  Martinko, J.M.,  Brock, Biology of Microorganisms, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 
2006, 11th  Edition. 

Online Course Material 

1. NPTEL Video Lectures on  Essentials in Immunology by Prof. R. Manjunath, Prof. 
Dipankar Nandi , Prof. Anjali Karande, Indian Institute of Science Bangalore  

(http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104108055/) 

2. NPTEL Video Lectures on Cellular and Molecular Immunology by Prof. Sachin Kumar, 
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati  (http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102103038/)    

 

 

 

 



Title Synaptic communication: function Number BBL6XX3 
and dysfunction 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 

Offered for B.Tech Type Elective 

Prerequisite Nil   

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide introduction to the basic principles to understand how synaptic communication 
works 

2. Provide an understanding of Synaptic function in health and disease 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Integrate their understanding of structural and functional units of the human brain for design 
of health technologies 
 

Contents 

 Synpatic structure: function and dysfunction (1 fractal) Resting membrane potential, 
action potential and impulse propagation, importance of ion channels, secondary 
messengers, Neurotransmitters, classes, criteria for classification, the synapse, synaptic 
transmission, electrical and chemical synapses, synaptic integration of information, 
Neuromuscular junction, primary and secondary motor cortex, integration of sensory 
signals to motor actions, motor neuron diseases [14lectures].   

Textbook 

1.  Kandel,E., (2012), Principles of Neural Science, 5th Edition, Elsevier 

2. Zigmond M (2012), Fundamental Neuroscience, 4th Edition Elsevier 

Reference Books 

1. Lodish B, Kaiser K (2016), Molecular Cell Biology, 8th Edition, WH Freeman 
 

Online Course Material 

1. Constantine-Paton M, 9.013J / 7.68J Cell and Molecular Neurobiology, Spring 2008, MIT 
OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: 
Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 
 

 

 



Title Microbes as sensors Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 1-0-0 [1] 

Offered for  Type Compulsory 

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives 

1. The instructor will discuss the methods by which living microbes can be used as 
sensors. 

 

Learning Outcomes 

1. Students will have an ability to design live microbial based biosensors for 
sensing specific pollutants, marker for environment and/or health monitoring 

Contents 

Introduction: Advantages of using microbes as sensors, physical and chemical 
methods of microbial, immobilization. (4 lectures) 

Electrochemical microbial biosensor: Amperometric, potentiometric and 
conductimetric (5 lectures) 

Optical biosensors; bioluminescence, fluorescence, and calorimetric based sensors 
(2 lectures). 

Metabolism based: Microbial sensors based on analysis of oxygen reduction rate or 
carbon di oxide production rate. (3 lectures) 

Textbook 

No textbook. The research papers will serve as the reading material and reference 
material 

Reference Books 

1. Brock, et al., (2012), Biology of Microorganisms, 13th edition Ben,jamin 
Cummings, Boston, MA. 

 

Online course material 

None 

 

 

 



Title Measurements in Remote Healthcare  Number CSL7XX0 

Department Computer Science & Enginering L-T-P [C] 1-0-0 [1] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives 

The instructor will: 

1. Discuss techniques to design the sensor-based system for remote healthcare 

2.  Provide mechanisms to design and develop mobile platforms for healthcare sensors 
& data 

Learning Outcomes 

The students will have an ability to: 

1. design end-to-end wireless sensors based system in remote areas 

2. critically identify and use the tools for sensor placement, and data processing 

 

Contents 

Contents 

Sensor, Networks & Data for Healthcare: Overview of wireless sensor networks, 
Network characteristics, Network Design and Challenges, Wireless Sensor Network 
Protocol Stack, Sensor Data aggregation techniques, Sensor Data storage, Data 
Management and Processing; Time Synchronisation in WSN: Need and Techniques; 
Sensor Node localisation: Need and Techniques; Security and Privacy - Authentication 
and Cryptography; Wireless Sensor and Actuator Networks - Bidirectional Network 
design (10 lectures) 

Healthcare on Mobile Platforms: Need for mobile platforms for healthcare applications, 
Mobile application development for Healthcare: Wireless Sensor Data collection 
(Bluetooth, WiFi, 3G, 4G), Data Processing and Alert generation; (4 lectures) 

Textbook 

1.  Jun Zheng, Abbas Jamalipour, (2009), Wireless Sensor Networks: A Networking 
Perspective, A John Wiley & Sons, IEEE Publication 

2. Nawaz Mohamudally, (2017), Smartphones from an Applied Research Perspective, 
InTech 

Reference Books 

1. Koushik Maharatna, Silvio Bonfiglio, (2014), Systems Design for Remote Healthcare, 
Springer 

Online course material 

 

 

 



Course Title  Analog and Interfacing Number EEL7XX0 
Circuits 

 

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for M. Tech. 1st year Type Compulsory 

Pre-requisite Digital and Analog Electronics    

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Familiarize students with the concepts of Analog IC Design and give them a 
comprehensive overview of various amplifiers. 

2. Familiarize the students with different building blocks of a mixed signal interface circuit 
design essential for sensors and IoT. 

Learning Outcomes 

Students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understand fundamental principles of CMOS Analog IC Design and interfacing of analog 
signals with the digital signal processing circuits. 

2. Apply the circuit design fundamentals for IoT applications. 
3. Work on design tools like Cadence/Mentor Graphics 
Contents 

EEL7XX1: Fundamentals of Analog Circuits and Design [1-0-0] 

(Fractal 1)Introduction toAnalog VLSI and design issues in CMOS technologies, MOS models, 
SPICE Models, Single stage amplifiers, Biasing circuits, Voltage and Current reference 
circuits, Feedback analysis, Multistage amplifiers, Mismatch and noise analysis, Differential 
amplifiers, Oscillators (14 Lectures) 

 

EEL7XX2: Readout Electronics [1-0-0] 

(Fractal 2)Switch capacitor circuits: Principles and applications in filter design; switches and 
related design issues, variable gain amplifier, low noise and high speed amplifier topologies. 
Analog to digital converters:Types of ADCs, static and dynamic characteristics; track and 
hold, and sample and hold circuits; comparators; detail design analysis for successive 
approximation register (SAR) ADCs, discrete-time and continuous time sigma-delta ADCs(14 
Lectures) 

 

EEL7XX3: Digital to Analog Converters Design [1-0-0] 

(Fractal 3)Digital to Analog Converters:Voltage-based DACs; charge-based DACs; current-
based DACs – binary and thermometer currents. Phase-locked loop: Basics; PLL dynamics; 
voltage controlled oscillator, frequency synthesis. Applications: Wearable Biomedical IoT 
nodes (14 Lectures) 

Text Books 

1. Razavi, B., (2016), Design of Analog CMOS Integrated Circuits, 2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill 
Education. 

2. R. Jacob Baker, H.W.Li, and D.E. Boyce, (2009), – CMOS Circuit Design ,Layout and 
Simulation, 2nd Edition, Prentice-Hall of India 



3. David A. Johns, Ken Martin, (2013), “Analog Integrated Circuit Design”, 2nd Edition, John 
Wiley and Sons. 

Self Learning material 

1. Shanthi Pavan, VLSI Data Conversion Circuits, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117106034/ 

2. Nagendra Krishnapura, Analog Integrated Circuit Design, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117106030/ 

Preparatory Course Material 

1. P. E. Allen, D. R. Holberg (2013), CMOS Analog Circuit Design, 3rd Edition, Oxford 
University Press. 

2. R. Gregorian, G. C. Temes, (2008), “Analog MOS Integrated Circuits for Signal 
Processing”, John Wiley and Sons. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

Program Elective Set 4 

 

Systems Biology 

  



 

Title Immunotechnology Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite Nil   

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will:Introduction to fundamentals of immunology, clinical immunology, 
Diagnostics and therapeutics  

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to:  understand immunological processes and 
analyze diagnostics  

Contents 

BBL7XX1: Fundamental Concepts: Antigen-Antibody Interactions [1-0-0] 

(Fractal 1)Precipitation, agglutination and complement mediated immune reactions; 
Advanced immunological techniques - RIA, ELISA, Western blotting, ELISPOT assay, 
immunofluorescence, flow cytometry; Biosensor assay (14 Lectures) 

BBL7XX2: Clinical Immunology [1-0-0] 

(Fractal 1) Clinical transplantation and immunosuppressive therapy; Tumor antigens; 
Immune response to tumors and tumor evasion of the immune system, Cancer 
Immunotherapy, Immunodeficiency-Primary immunodeficiencies, Acquired or secondary 
immunodeficiencies, case studies (14 Lectures) 

BBL7XX3: Vaccines and Drug Therapy [1-0-0] 

(Fractal 3) Active and passive immunization; Live, killed, attenuated, sub unit vaccines; 
Vaccine technology- Role and properties of adjuvants, recombinant DNA and protein 
based vaccines, plant-based vaccines, reverse vaccinology; Peptide vaccines, conjugate 
vaccines; Antibody genes and antibody engineering- chimeric and hybrid monoclonal 
antibodies; Catalytic antibodies and generation of immunoglobulin gene libraries (14 
Lectures) 

Textbook  

1. Janeway,C (1996), Immunobiology, 4th EditionGarland Publishing 
 

Reference Books  

1. R,A, Goldsby., Thomas,J.K., and Barbara,A, Osborne. (2002), Kuby Immunology, 6th 
Edition Freeman  

Online Course Material  

1. Manjunath R., Nandi D, Karande A, Essentials in Immunology, Indian Institute of Science 
Bangalore, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104108055/, NPTEL Course Material. 

2. Kumar S, Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102103038/, NPTEL Course Material. 

  



 

Title Thermodynamics and Chemical Kinetics Number CYL6XX1 

CYL6XX3 

Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives  

 The Instructor will: 

1. Provide the connection between microscopic theory and thermodynamics.  
2. Describe how complex phenomena can be transferred into simple models. 

 
Learning Outcomes  

The students will have an ability to: 

1. Predict properties of many-body systems starting from its microscopic  
constituents and their interactions 

2. Connect microscopic theory to chemical reaction 
Contents  

CYL6XX1: Thermodynamics [1-0-0] 

thermodynamics laws, state and path functions and their applications; thermodynamic 
description of various types of processes; Maxwell’s relations; spontaneity and equilibria 

Temperature and pressure dependence of thermodynamic quantities; Le Chatelier’s principle 
(14 lectures) 

CYL6XX3: Chemical Kinetics [1-0-0] 

Empirical rate laws and temperature dependence; complex reactions; steady state 
approximation, determination of reaction mechanisms 

Mechanism: Theory of reaction rates, activation energy, transition state theory, potential 
energy surface, uni-molecular reaction rate, enzyme kinetics, salt effects (14 lectures). 

Text Books 

1. D. McQuarrie and J. D. Simon, (2014) Molecular Thermodynamics, Viva Books. 

2. D. McQuarrie, (2011) Physical Chemistry, A Molecular Approach, Viva Books. 

Self Learning Material 

K. J. Laidler, (2013) Chemical Kinetics, Pearson. 

Self Learning Material 

1. V.Balakrishnan, Department of Physics, IIT Madras. http://nptel.iitm.ac.in 

2. De, A. K. Advanced Chemical Thermodynamics and Kinetics, NPTEL Course Material, 
Chemical Sciences, IISER Mohali, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_cy20/ 

 

 



Title Synthetic Biology  Number BB7XX0 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P 3–0–0 [3] 
[C] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite Nil   

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Teach the workings of DNA, RNA and proteins at their level of structure, regulatory 
elements and networks as building blocks or “biobricks” that can then be assembled into novel 
“devices” and “systems”.  

2. enable students to create simple circuits from biological components.  

3. Enable hands-on design and understanding of modularity and construction via Laboratory 
exercises using computer software enabling coding DNA sequences and simulating genetic 
engineering experiments  

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Analyze biological systems from an engineering perspective 

2.Imagine engineering solutions that can solve biological problems OR get inspired by biology 
to solve engineering problems. 

Contents 

Introduction to Synthetic Biology: Introduction to DNA, RNA, proteins and standard functional 
components of a cell, Basics of coding with DNA: Registry of standard biological parts, Analytical 
Tools: Genomics, Proteomics, Metabolomics (7 lectures) 

Simulation Tools:Gene designer, Serial Cloner, Vector NTI, Lab sessions in computer center (7 
lectures) 

Experimental Tools: PCR: Basics of PCR, Primer design, Error detection and correction. Gel 
electrophoresis: gel extraction ligation and transformation, Biobrick discovery and creation 
technique: mining nature for parts, Creating new parts with PCR, Cloning: basics, Cloning a 
new part into a “BioBrick” vector, Sequencing. (14 lectures) 

Quality control: Quality control Screens, Standardized Measurements for BioBricks, Assembly 
and measurement of a BioBrick system (7 lectures) 

Designing with Synthetic Biology: iGEM questions: What do you want Biology to do for you? 
Student presentations (7 lectures) 

Textbook  

1.Freemont, S. P , Kitney, R.I, Synthetic Biology-a primer, 1st Edition  

Reference Books  

1. Church GM, Regis E, Regenesis: How Synthetic Biology Will Reinvent Nature and Ourselves. 

 

 

 



Self-learning Material  

http://synbio.mit.edu/education.html 

http://www.synberc.org/content/articles/what-synthetic-biology 

  



 

Title Ordinary Differential Equations Number MAL6XX0 

Department Mathematics L-T-P 3–0–0-1[4] 
[C] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite Nil   

Objectives 

1. Introduce the concepts of existence and uniqueness of solution of ordinary differential 
equations 

2. Develop analytical techniques to solve ordinary differential equations 

3. Understand the properties of solution of ordinary differential equations 

Learning Outcomes 

1. Understanding existence, uniqueness, and other properties of a solution of ordinary differential 
equations 

2. Solving ordinary differential equations with series method, Green's function method 

3. Solving systems of ODEs, and characterization of their solutions 

Contents 

Motivations and origins, Existence-Uniqueness [7 Lectures]: Existence of solutions by Picard’s 
method, uniqueness and continuous dependence w.r.t. initial conditions and parameters, 
continuation of solutions, existence  and uniqueness of solutions to system of differential 
equations. 

Second Order Linear Equations [23 Lectures]: General solution of differential equations using 
method of undetermined coefficients, method of variation of parameters, variable coefficients 
equations, Power series solution method, Legendre’s equation, Frobenius method, Bessel’s 
equation, Green's function method, Sturm-Liouville problems, orthogonal eigen-function 
expansions, Sturm comparison theorem, Sturm separation theorem, 

Systems of Differential Equations [10 Lectures]: Phase plane method, critical points of the system 
and their stability analysis, algebraic properties of solutions, the eigenvalue-eigenvector method 
of finding solutions, fundamental matrix solutions, matrix exponential, nonhomogeneous 
equations. 

Text Books 

1. Ross, S. L., Introduction to ordinary differential equations, 4th Ed., John Wiley Publications, 
1989 

2. Braun. M., Differential Equations and Their Applications, 3rd  Ed., Springer-Verlag, 1983 

3. Chicone, C., Ordinary Differential Equations with Applications, 2nd  Ed., Springer, 2006 

Reference Books 

1. Coddington, E. A., An Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations, PHI Learning 1999 



2. Birkhoff, G. and Rota G., Ordinary Differential Equations, 4th Ed., Wiley Publications, 1989 

3. Simmons, G., Differential Equations with Applications and Historical Notes, 2nd Ed., McGraw 
Hill Education, 2017 

Online Course Material 

1. Agrawal, P. N. and Pandey, D. N. (IIT Roorkee), Ordinary and partial differential equations and 
applications, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107111/ 

2. Raghavendra V. (IIT Kanpur), Ordinary differential equations , 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111104031/ 

  



Title Numerical Methods for PDE Number MAL7XX0 

Department Mathematics L-T-P 1–0–0-0 [1] 
[C] 

Offered for  Type Elective  

Prerequisite    

Objectives 

The Instructor will 

1. Introduce finite difference schemes for numerical solutions of partial differential equations. 

2. Carry out numerical analysis of various finite difference schemes. 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Apply finite difference schemes for numerical solution of partial differential equations. 

2. Undertake out error analysis and stability analysis of finite difference schemes 

Contents 

[8 Lectures] Characterization of PDEs, Finite difference methods for elliptic, parabolic and 
hyperbolic problems. 

[6 Lectures] Stability, consistency and convergence theory, dissipation and dispersion, error 
estimates. 

Text books 

1. Quarteroni, A. and Valli, A. , Numerical Approximation of Partial Differential Equations, 
Springer, 1997 

2. Morton, K. W. and Mayers, D. F. , Numerical solution of partial differential equations, CUP, 
2005 

Reference Books 

1. Thomas, J. W. , Numerical partial differential equations: Finite difference methods, Springer, 
1995 

2. Trefethen, L. N. and David Bau III, Numerical Linear Algebra, SIAM, 1997 

Online Course Material 

1. Nayak, A. K. , Numerical methods: Finite Difference Approach, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107107/ 

 

 

 

Title Flux Balance Analysis Number BBL7XX0 



Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P 3–0–0[3] 
[C] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite Nil   

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide an introduction to flux balance analysis (FBA), reactions,  metabolites, & pathways, 
mass balanced linear equations, biomass reaction, how to create a stoichiometric matrix from 
reactions and metabolites, gene-protein-reaction associations, constraint-based modeling. 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Implement knowledge of important concepts related to the FBA 

2. To apply them to model the behavior of biological systems as well as develop strategies for 
manipulating them. 

Contents 

Flux Balance Analysis Overview: Overview, Formulation of Flux Balance Analysis [1 Lecture] 

Reactions, Metabolites, & Pathways: Identifying Metabolic Reactions and Metabolites (Gene-
Protein-Reactions), Desired Reaction Information, Genome-scale Reconstruction Reactions, 
Desired Metabolite Information, Genome-scale Reconstruction Metabolites, Metabolic Pathway, 
System Boundaries:Exchange & Transport Reactions, Genome-scale Metabolic Reconstructions, 
Reconstruction Process: 96 Step Protocol, E.coli Core Model [14 Lectures] 

Mathematical Representation of Reactions & Constraints: Creating A Stoichiometric Matrix, 
Genome-scale Metabolic Reconstruction [2 Lectures] 

Mass Balanced Linear Equations: How can we use the Stoichiometric Matrix?, Dynamic Mass 
Balance, The Conceptual Basis of Constraint-based Modeling, Role of Constraints, Flux 
Optimization [6 Lectures] 

Biomass Reaction: Biomass Precursors, E.coli Precursor Metabolites, Maintenance Energy 
Requirements, Biomass Reaction For E.coli Core Model, Biomass Objective Function, Formulation 
of Flux Balance Analysis, E.coli Core Model [8 Lectures] 

Calculating Fluxes: Cobra Toolbox, Matlab, Drawing Flux Values on a Map, Print Flux Values, 
Examples [8 Lectures] 

Flux Balance Analysis Toolbox: Methods in Constraint-based Reconstruction and Analysis [3 
Lectures] 

Textbook 

1.Palsson B. O., (2006), Systems Biology: Properties of Reconstructed Networks, cambridge 
Press. 

Self Learning Material 

1. Utah State University, https://systemsbiology.usu.edu/syllabus.php 

 

 

Preparatory Course Material 

1. Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 



https://nptel.ac.in/noc/individual_course.php?id=noc18-bt22 

  



Title Systems Biology in Personalized Genomics Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P 3–0–0[3] 
[C] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite Nil   

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Illustrate “big-data” problems in personalized genomics by discussing recent publications 

2. Provide training in high dimensional biological data analysis 

3. Familiarize the participants with the use of statistical tools and principles for analyzing 
genomic/epigenomic data 

Learning Outcomes 

It will enable participants to utilize the methods presented in this course for analyzing biological 
data. The course introduces the current research challenges faced in the field of computational 
systems biology. 

Contents 

Course Overview and Introduction: Design Principles of Complex Systems, Introduction to 
Genomics and Systems Biology [2 lectures] 

Topological and Network Evolution Models: Small-World and Scale-Free Networks, Duplication-
Divergence, Complex Models of Network Evolution, Network Properties of Biological Networks [6 
lectures] 

Types of Biological Networks: Types of Biological Networks, Genes2Networks and Network 
Visualization, Sets2Networks - Creating Functional Association Networks, Genes2FANs - Analyzing 
Gene Lists with Functional Association Networks [4 lectures] 

Data Processing and Identifying Differentially Expressed Genes: Data Normalization, Univariate 
and multivariate methods for identifying differentially expressed gene sets  - Part 1, Univariate 
methods (SAM, Welch’s t-test, LIMMA,) - Part 2, Multivariate method (Principal Component 
Analysis; Gene Set Enrichment Analysis; Supervised and unsupervised machine learning for data 
classification, including Clustering, SVM and KNN) [15 lectures] 

Analytical Tools for Genomics: Enrichment Analysis and Enrichr, GEO2Enrichr: A Google Chrome 
Extension for Gene Set Extraction and Enrichment, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) - 
Preliminaries, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA), Principal Angle Enrichment Analysis (PAEA), 
Network2Canvas (N2C) and Enrichment Analysis with N2C, Expression2Kinases: Inferring 
Pathways from Differentially Expressed Genes, DrugPairSeeker and the New CMAP, Classifying 
Patients/Tumors from TCGA [15lectures] 

Textbook 

1.    Ma'ayan A. and MacArthur B. D. (eds.) (2012), New Frontiers of Network Analysis in Systems 
Biology, Springer. 

 



Reference Books 

Research literature 

Self learning materials 

1. Mount Sinai Center for Bioinformatics, https://www.coursera.org/learn/network-biology 

  



Title Artificial Intelligence in Bioengineering Number BBP7XX0 
Lab 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 0-0-2 [1] 

Offered for  Type Open 
Elective  

Prerequisite Machine Learning-1   

 

Objective: 

The instructor will: 

1. prepare industry relevant advanced cross-disciplinary skills in machine learning 
applications in bioengineering. 

Learning Outcome 

The students will have an ability to: 

1. comprehend fundamental concepts and hands-on techniques of the state-of-the-
art data science and deep learning methodologies 

2. apply popular unsupervised learning methods, including clustering methodologies 
and supervised methods such as deep neural networks 

3. master techniques in modern data analysis to leverage big datasets from omics, 
image and sensors; use pyspark skillfully to analyze big data 

 

Laboratory Experiments 

Introduction: data types, big data processing using pyspark (3 labs) 

Machine learning applications: supervised and unsupervised techniques for omics 
data integration and analysis (4 labs) 

Deep learning: applications in omics, image and sensor data (7 labs) 

Textbook 

1. Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben-David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From 
Theory to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press 

2. Tseng,G., Ghosh,D., Zhou X.J., (2015), Integrating Omics Data, Cambridge 
University Press 

Self-Learning Material  

1. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 

https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 

Preparatory Course Material 

1. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/pyspark/ 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Program Elective Set 5 

Biomaterials Engineering 

  



 

Title Biophysics Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [D] 2-0-0 [2] 

Offered for M.Tech Students Type Elective 

Prerequisite Nil   

 

Objectives:  

1. To learn the fundamentals of biological problems tackled by biophysicists ranging from 
the structure of small molecules to organs or physiological functions. 

 

Learning Outcome:   

The students will have an ability to  

1. Understand selected biological phenomena using physical principles.  
2. Utilize physical methods in the study of biological systems. 
 

Content: 

Introduction: Forces in living system, Thermodynamics of living systems; Conservation of 
energy in living systems, Entropy and Life, Gibbs and Standard free energy, Equilibrium 
constant, Coupled reactions.(7 lectures) 

Conformational stability of biomolecules:  Forces for protein stability, Protein denaturation 
and renaturation, Protein folding pathways, Levinthal’s paradox, Molten globule, Folding 
accessory proteins, structural stability of DNA and RNA, biophysics of chromatin packing (7 
lectures) 

Molecular self-assembly:  Organization of lipids in aqueous environment, Formation of 
vesicles, Transport of biomolecules: Diffusion, Osmosis, Facilitated diffusion, Active 
transport, function of ion channels Biophysical properties of cell membrane: Membrane 
potential, Action potential and resting phase. (7 lectures) 

Bioimpedance and biopotentials Cell motility: mechanism of pseudopodia formation and 
ciliary movement, muscle contraction Cellular mechanotransduction, tensigrity model for 
bone remodeling, flow induced shear stress Molecular Techniques used in biophysics: Atomic 
force microscopy, optical tweezers,  patch clamp, FRET, confocal microscopy, super 
resolution microscopy, XRD and NMR. (7 lectures) 

Textbook:  

Cotterill Rodney M.J., (2014) Biophysics:introduction, John Wiley ISBN-13: 978-8126551606 

Reference book: 

Leake, M.C., (2017) Biophysics: Tools and Techniques 1st edition CRC Press ISBN-13: 978-
1138407374 

Self-learning Material: 

https://www.biophysics.org/education-careers/education-resources/additional-education-
resource 

  



 

Title Materials characterization Number MTL6XX0 

Department Material Science & Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite Nil   

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1.Provide introduction to surface chemistry and physics of selected metals, polymers, 
and ceramics; surface characterization methodology; modification of biomaterials 
surfaces; quantitative assays 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. understand areas of application based on bulk properties of implants; and acute and 
chronic response to implanted biomaterials. General topics include biosensors, drug 
delivery, and tissue engineering. 

Contents  

Introduction to the interactions between cells and the surfaces of biomaterialsSurface 
chemistry and physics of selected metals, polymers, and ceramics; surface 
characterization methodology; modification of biomaterials surfaces; quantitative assays 
of cell behavior in culture; biosensors and microarrays; bulk properties of implants; and 
acute and chronic response to implanted biomaterials. General topics include biosensors, 
drug delivery, and tissue engineering.  Experiments illustrating the principles of quantum 
mechanics, thermodynamics and structure with intensive oral and written technical 
communication practice. Specific topics include: experimental exploration of the 
connections between energetics, bonding and structure of materials, and application of 
these principles in instruments for materials characterization; demonstration of the 
wave-like nature of electrons; hands-on experience with techniques to quantify energy 
(DSC), bonding (XPS, AES, FTIR, UV/Vis and force spectroscopy), and degree of order 
(x-ray scattering) in condensed matter; and investigation of structural transitions and 
structure-property relationships through practical materials examples. (14lectures) 

Textbook 

1.Ikada, Y., and H. Tsuji(2000), Biodegradable Polyesters for Medical and Ecological 
Applications. Macromolecular Rapid Communications 21: 117-132 

2. Marazuela, M. D., and M. C. Moreno-Bondi (2002). Fiber-optic Biosensors - An 
Overview. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 372: 664-682. 

Self Learning Material  

1. Mayes, A. Materials for Biomedical Applications MIT OpenCourseWare Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA  

Title Tissue Engineering & Medical Device Implants Number BBL7XX0 



Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech Students Type Elective  

 

Objective:  

1. The major objective of the course would be to give a brief introduction of Tissue 
Engineering, Medical Device & Implants and insights onto their use for generation of 
Medical Devices. Highlight current understanding, challenges and future applicative 
potentials of Medical Device & Implants. 

 

Learning Outcomes:  

The students will have an ability to: 

1. Students completing the course would gain an introductive experience of the field and able 
to comprehend with common terminologies. 

 

Contents: 

BBL7XX1: Tissue engineering and dynamics [1-0-0] 

(fractal, 1) Tissue Engineering Introduction: Introduction to tissue engineering, Cells as 
therapeutic Agents with examples, Cell numbers and growth rates Tissue organization, Tissue 
Components, Tissue types, Functional subunits. (7 lectures) 

Tissue Dynamics: Dynamic states of tissues, Homeostasis in highly prolific tissues and Tissue 
repair. Angiogenesis. Cell-extracellular matrix interactions - Binding to the ECM, Modifying the 
ECM, Malfunctions in ECM signaling. Direct Cell-Cell contact - Cell junctions in tissues, 
malfunctions in direct cell-cell contact signaling. Response to mechanical stimuli (7 lectures) 

BBL7XX2: Measurements of cell characteristics and Biomaterials 1 [1-0-0] 

(fractal, 2) Measurement of cell characteristics: Cell morphology, cell number and viability, 
cell-fate processes, cell motility, cell function. Cell and tissue culture - types of tissue culture, 
media, culture environment and maintenance of cells in vitro, cryopreservation. Basis for Cell 

Separation, characterization of cell separation, methods of cell separation (7 lectures)  

Biomaterials in tissue engineering: Biodegradable polymers and polymer scaffold 
processing. 

In vivo cell & tissue engineering case studies: Artificial skin, Artificial blood vessels, Artificial  

Pancreas, Nerve Regeneration (7 lectures) 

BBL7XX3: Medical devices and implants [1-0-0] 

(fractal, 3) Medical Device & Implants Introduction: Medical Device Classification, Bioethics and 
Privacy, Biocompatibility and Sterilization Techniques. Concept Design and Principles of Medical 
Device:Implants  and Clinical Tools: Design Control & Regulatory Requirements. Introduction 
to specific medical technologies (7 lectures) 

Biopotentials measurement: EMG, EOG, ECG, EEG, Medical Diagnostics (In-vitro diagnostics), 
MedicalDiagnostics (Imaging), Minimally Invasive Devices, Surgical Tools and Implants (7 
lectures) 



Textbook 

1. Lanza, R., Langer, R., Vacanti, J., (2018), Principles of Tissue Engineering, 4th Edition, 
eBook  

Self Learning Material 

1.Swaminathan, S., Tissue Engineering, Sastra University,  

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102106036/#  

Preparatory Course Material:   

1. Design of BioMedical Devices and Systems, Utsaah University, 
http://cpdm.iisc.ac.in/utsaah/pd233/ 

 

 

 

 



Title Thermodynamics & Kinetics of Materials – Number MTL6XX1 
Material properties 

Department Material Science & Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite Nil   

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1.Provide introduction to thermodynamics and kinetics of materials and their effect on 
material properties 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. understand areas of application based on thermodynamic properties  

 

Contents  

Treatment of the laws of thermodynamics and their applications to equilibrium and the 
properties of materials. Provides a foundation to treat general phenomena in materials 
science and engineering, including chemical reactions, magnetism, polarizability, and 
elasticity. Develops relations pertaining to multiphase equilibria as determined by a 
treatment of solution thermodynamics. Develops graphical constructions that are essential 
for the interpretation of phase diagrams. Treatment includes electrochemical equilibria and 
surface thermodynamics. Introduces aspects of statistical thermodynamics as they relate to 
macroscopic equilibrium phenomena (14 lectures). 

 

Textbook 

1. Ikada, Y., and H. Tsuji(2000), Biodegradable Polyesters for Medical and Ecological 
Applications. Macromolecular Rapid Communications 21: 117-132 

2. Marazuela, M. D., and M. C. Moreno-Bondi (2002). Fiber-optic Biosensors - An Overview. 
Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 372: 664-682. 

 

Self Learning Material  

1. Mayes, A. Materials for Biomedical Applications MIT OpenCourseWare Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA  

 

  



Title Computational modelling in materials design Number MSL7XX0 

Department Materials Science & Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite Nil   

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide introduction to modeling and simulation, covering continuum methods, atomistic and 
molecular simulation, and quantum mechanics.  

2. Provide Hands-on training is provided in the fundamentals and applications of these 
methods to key engineering problems. 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understand areas of application based on the scientific exploitation of the power of 
computation. 

Contents  

Energy models from classical potentials to first-principles approaches: Energy models from 
classical potentials to first-principles approaches; density functional theory and the total-
energy pseudo-potential method; errors and accuracy of quantitative predictions: 
thermodynamic ensembles, Monte Carlo sampling and molecular dynamics simulations; free 
energy and phase transitions; fluctuations and transport properties; and coarse-graining 
approaches and mesoscale models. (7lectures). 

Case studies from industrial applications of advanced materials to nanotechnology:  

Several laboratories will give students direct experience with simulations of classical force  

fields, electronic-structure approaches, molecular dynamics, and Monte Carlo. (7lectures). 

Textbook  

1.Dieter,G.E., (1986), Mechanical Metallurgy, 3rd Edition, McGraw Hill Book Company 

2. Courtney,T.H., (2005), Mechanical Behaviour of Materials, 2nd Edition, Waveland Press 
Inc. 

3. Shetty,M.N., (2013), Dislocations and Mechanical Behaviour of Materials, Prentice Hall 
India Learning Private Limited 

Self-Learning Material  

1. Bauri,R.,  Introduction to Materials Science and Engineering, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106032/       

2. vanVliet,K., 3.22 Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Spring 2008, MIT OpenCourseWare 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons 
BY-NC-SA 

  



Title Biomechanics Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [D] 2-0-0 [2] 

Offered for M.Tech Students Type Elective 

Prerequisite Nil   

 

Objective: 

The instructor will: 

1. Elucidate the role of Biomechanics in the field of Bioscience & Bioengineering with special 
emphasis on use in improving tissue repair and regeneration. 

 

Learning Outcome:  

The students will have an ability to: 

1. Understand and apply Biomechanics and their Fundamental Principles. 

2. Design the cutting edge applications of Biomechanics  

Contents 

Introduction to Biomechanics: Cellular Mechanics Static and dynamic cell processes; Cell 
adhesion, migration and aggregation; Mechanics of bio-membranes (7 lectures) 

Cytoskeleton and cortex: Microrheological properties and their implications; 
Mechanotransduction; Experimental methods - passive and active rheology, motility and 
adhesion assays (7 lectures) 

Tissue Mechanics:  Elastic (time independent); viscoelastic and poro-elastic (time-dependent) 
behavior of tissues; Continuum and microstructural models; Constitutive laws; 
Electromechanical and physicochemical properties of tissues; Physical regulation of 
cellular metabolism; Experimental methods - macroscopic rheology (14 lectures) 

Textbook  

1. Huston, R.L., (2014) Principles of Biomechanics, CRC Press 

2.  Koeppen, M., Bruce, A., Mosby, B., (2009) Stanton Berne & Levy Physiology, 6th Edition,  

Online Course Material 

https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/112106059/ 

 

 

 

 

Title Biomaterials and Bioengineering Number BBL7XX0 



Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite None   

Objective 

The Instructor will: 

1.  inspire future potential of bioengineering discipline 

2. provide cutting edge knowledge and applications of biomaterials in tissue engineering, drug 
delivery, biomechanics and reconstitution various biological events 

Learning Outcome 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. understand how biomaterials are useful for various biotechnological and bioengineering 
applications 

Contents 

Background and definition of biomaterials: classes of materials used biotechnological 
applications and in medicine: polymers, metals, ceramics, natural materials and composites, 
biodegradable polymers in medicine: polymers, liposomes, hydrogels, silicone biomaterials and 
medical fibers, degradation of materials in the biological environment, types of polymer 
degradation. influence of polymer properties on degradation, influence of biological 
environment on polymer degradation (14 lectures) 

Surface engineering of biomaterials: biological testing of biomaterials: in vitro assessment of 
materials for tissue compatibility, in vivo assessment of tissue compatibility. host reactions to 
biomaterials and their evaluations, the role of adsorbed proteins in tissue response to 
biomaterials. cell, extra cellular matrix, and tissue interactions with biomaterials, 
inflammation, wound healing and foreign body response to biomaterials. immune response to 
foreign materials. toxicity, tumor genesis and biomaterials (14 lectures) 

Microscopes for monitoring biomaterials and their dynamics: tirf and confocal, applications in 
drug delivery and nanomedicine, bioengineering concept to reconstitute cell like micro-
chambers: flow-chambers and artificial cell, bioengineered platform for monitoring microtubule 
dynamics, bioengineered platform for monitoring microtubule motility and organization, 
bioengineered platform for monitoring microtubule force, reconstitution of kinesin transport 
using engineered biomaterials, applications in brain injury, repairing and future applications 
(14 lectures) 

Textbook 

1. Latest Research articles (ChemBioChem, Molecular Biosystem, AngewChem, ACS Chemical 
Biology, JACS, ChemComm, ACS Chemical Neuroscience etc.) 

Self Learning Material  

None 

Preparatory Course Material 

None 

  



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Program Elective Set 6 

Bioenergy & Environmental Technologies 

  



Title Bioenergy Systems  Course  BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering  L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective  

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives 

The instructor will: 

1.  Acquaint students with the principles and applications of bio-energy harnessing systems 
ranging from conventional processes to the latest developments in the area  

2.  Enable students integrate two or more renewable energy processes to achieve a 
sustainable energy harvesting system 

 

Learning Outcomes 

The students will have an ability to: 

1.  Utilize biomass as sustainable fuel 

2.  Utilize the knowledge of bioenergy systems while integrating bioenergy with other 
renewable energy systems 

 

Contents 

Overview: Different bio-energy systems, sustainable bio-energy, different types of biomass 
(including forestry residues) and their processing, Principles of bio-energy harnessing by 
nature, Photosynthesis-natural solar energy capture process (6 lectures) 

Anaerobic fermentation technology: Biogas production, process, microbiology, different types 
of bioreactors, basic process kinetics(8 lectures) 

Biomass gasification technology: Syngas production process, different types of gasification 
reactors, factors affecting the process (6 lectures) 

Liquid biofuels [6 lectures]: Various types of biofuels,1st and 2nd generation biofuels, Algal 
Biofuels, ASTM standards for biofuels, Basic biochemical processes, engineering of biofuel 
producing organisms, metabolic engineering (6 lectures) 

Microbial fuel cells: Basic principle, Bioelectricity and different reactor configurations (4 
lectures) 

Artificial photosynthesis: Mimicking natural solar energy capture process, biohydrogen (3 
lectures) 

Downstream processes for product recovery: Basic processes like filtration, centrifugation, and 
solvent extraction(5 lectures) 

Applications: Technical uses of bioenergy, Systems Approaches to Bio-fuels Sustainability, 
positive environmental implications of bioenergy systems, Commercialization and 



Economics of bio-energy technologies (4 lectures) 

Textbooks 

1. Vertes, A. A., Qureshi, A., Yukawa, H.,  Blaschek, H.P.,(2010) Biomass to Biofuels, Wiley. 
2. German Solar Energy Society, Ecofys, (2006) Planning and installing bioenergy systems: A 

guide for installers, architects and engineers, Earthscan,  
 

Reference Books 

1.  Stanier, R. Y., (2009) General Microbiology, W.H. Freeman and Co. 

2.  Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E. C. S., Krieg, N.R.,(2001) Microbiology, Tata McGraw - Hill Education 

Online course material 

1. Michelle O'Malley, Fueling Sustainability: Engineering Microbial Systems for Biofuel 
Production, Spring 2011, MIT OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 

 

  



Title Environmental Biotechnology and Number BBL7XX0 
Bioremediation 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Compulsory  

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives 

The instructor will: 

1.  acquaint students with the way wastes/wastewaters as well as toxic wastes are treated 

2.  teach methods pertaining to sustainable wastewater recycling 

Learning Outcomes 

The students will have an ability to: 

1.  Understand increasing water, soil or air pollution because of industrialization and how 
biotechnology can circumvent these problems 

2.  design a treatment process based on the characteristics of the wastewater to be treated 

 

Contents 

Introduction: Basics of Microbiology, Stoichiometry and Bacterial energetics (5 lectures) 

Kinetics and Reactors: Microbial Kinetics and Biofilm kinetics, Reactor types, Mass balances, 
Batch reactor, Continuous stirred tank reactor (7 lectures) 

The activated sludge process: Characteristics of activated sludge, Process configurations, 
Design and operating criteria, aeration systems and sludge separation (5 lectures) 

Nitrification and denitrification: Bacterial physiology and basic process including biofilm and 
hybrid (4 lectures) 

Phosphorus removal: Normal phosphorus uptake into biomass, precipitation and enhanced 
biological removal (4 lectures) 

Drinking water treatment: Aerobic biofilm processes to remove biological instability, 
biodegradation and denitrification (4 lectures) 

Anaerobic treatment by methanogenesis: Reactor configurations, Process chemistry and 
Microbiology, Process kinetics (4 lectures) 

Detoxification of hazardous chemicals: Molecular recalcitrance, Biodegradation of problem 
environmental contaminants (4 lectures) 

Bioremediation: Scope and characteristics of contaminants, Biodegradability, Treatability 
studies, Engineering strategies for bioremediation, Biotechnological and genetics 
engineering approaches-creations of superbugs (4 lectures) 

 



Textbooks 

1. Rittmann, B.E., McCarty, P.L., (2001) Environmental Biotechnology: Principles and 
Applications ,Tata McGraw Hill. 

Reference books  

1. Shuler, M., Kargi, F., (2002)Bioprocess Engineering: Basic Concepts, 2nd  edition Prentice 
Hall. 

2. Stanier, R. Y., (2009) General Microbiology, W.H. Freeman and Co. 
 

Online course material: 

1.  Gargi Singh, Applied Environmental Microbiology, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/105107173/ 

  



 

Title Bio-electrochemical Systems   Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B Tech.  Type Compulsory  

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives 

1.  The instructor will acquaint students with Microbial fuel cell technology and the merits 
associated with the technology 

Learning Outcomes 

The students will have an ability to: 

1.  utilize microorganisms with electricity production and design bioelectrochemical systems for 
various applications 

2.  understand a system involving electrochemistry, Microbiology, material Science & Chemical 
Engineering all in one go. 

 

Contents 

Introduction: Introduction to bio-electrochemical systems  (2 lectures) 

Electrochemistry: The Nernst equation and electrochemical potential difference, the redox 
reactions, calculating and measuring potentials (3 lectures) 

Microbiology: The exoelectrogenic microbes, microbial physiology, the electron donors, the 
electron acceptors. (3 lectures) 

Components & configuration: the anode, cathode, membrane, the connections, double 
chambered, Single chamber, air cathode and sediment type MFCS (3 lectures) 

Characterization: Electrochemical sensors, chronoamperometry, cyclic voltammetry, 
differential pulse voltammetry, Electrochemical Impedance spectroscopy, Optical Sensors, 
colorimetry, fluorescence (7 lectures) 

Applications of bio-electrochemical systems:  Power generation, water treatment, 
bioremediation (4 lectures) 

Bio electrochemical system for Hydrogen production: Integrating MFCs with external power to 
generate hydrogen (2 lectures) 

Scope and the future: Integration of MFC with other energy generation technologies (4 
lectures) 

Textbooks 

1. Rittmann, B.E., McCarty, P.L., (2001) Environmental Biotechnology: Principles and 
Applications ,Tata McGraw Hill. 



Reference books  

1. Shuler, M., Kargi, F., (2002) Bioprocess Engineering: Basic Concepts, 2nd  edition Prentice 
Hall. 

2. Stanier, R. Y., (2009) General Microbiology, W.H. Freeman and Co. 
 

Online course material: 

  



 

Title Environmental Microbiology Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2-0-0 [2] 

Offered for  Type Compulsory 

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives 

The instructor will: 

1. Enable students utilize the knowledge of Microbiology for environmental cycling and 
enhanced agriculture productivity. 

 

Learning Outcomes 

The students will have an ability to: 

1. Understand the ecological interactions of Microbes in detail and will be able to 
associate the structure and function of a particular microbial community in a particular 
environment. 

2. Understand the soil plant interactions, how microbes make nutrients available for plant 
growth and how that helps in enhanced crop productivity. 

Contents 

 Environmental and Agricultural microbiology: Microbial Ecology, Microbial   Evolution 
and Biodiversity, Interactions among Microbial Populations, Interactions between 
Microorganisms and Plants, Plant growth promoting bacteria, Microbial Interactions with 
Animals, Microbial Communities and Ecosystems, Measurement of Microbial Numbers, 
Biomass, and Activities, Effects of Abiotic Factors and Environmental Extremes on 
Microorganisms, Microorganisms in Their Natural Habitats: Air, Water, and Soil 
Microbiology, Biogeochemical cycling, soil, waste, water management, Microorganisms in 
Mineral and Energy Recovery and Fuel and Biomass Production. (28 lectures) 

 

Textbook 

1.    Atlas, R.M., Bartha, R., (2001) Microbial Ecology: Fundamentals and 
applications, Pearson 

2.    Jawetz, Melnick, Adelberg (2018) Medical Microbiology, 28th Edition McGraw Hill 

 

Reference Books 

1.    Brock, et al., (2012), Biology of Microorganisms, 13th edition Ben,jamin 
Cummings, Boston, MA. 



2.    Lehninger, A., Nelson, D.L., Cox, M., (2009) Principles of Biochemistry, W.H. 
Freeman and Co. 

Online course material 

1. David Schauer, and Edward DeLong. 20.106J Systems Microbiology. Fall 2006. 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, 
https://ocw.mit.edu.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Title Water Energy Nexus Number MEL7XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P 3-0-0 

Offered for M. Tech and PhD Type Program Elective 

Objectives: 

1. Course designed to understand relation of energy of water use in our daily lives as well 
as water use for energy and food production. 

2. To enable plan pathways of water life cycle according the end-use requirements in 
municipal/ agriculture/ industrial environments. . 

 

Learning Outcomes: 

1. Ability to design energy/cost optimized systems according to location specific end-use 
requirements and water availability 

2. To have capability to locate correct locations where energy intensity as well as water 
efficiency measurements of the water transport within systems can be performed.  

Contents: 

Introduction to energy-water nexus: Hydro-electric power production, Water Life Cycle in the 
different economic sectors 

Energy intensity (Joule/Litre etc.) definition, Equivalent electrical energy intensity [kWh/m3], 
Basic unit conversion, factors of energy conversion from thermal to electrical & vice versa 

Water extraction from ground as well as surface. Pumping efficiency, effect of lift and other 
influencing parameters, Different modes of surface water transfer. 

General overview of conventional water treatment energy use, Intro to thermal desalination, 
Membrane desalination systems, hybrid desalination systems .Renewable and non-renewable 
sources of energy and its influence of energy intensity . 

Discussion on water end-use based electrical and thermal energy consumption. Electricity 
consumption in Residential water use: Clothes Washing, doing dishes, heating water, cooking 
water based foods. Commercial buildings and Energy use; Do buildings consume energy or 
the people within, Human behaviour and variation in energy consumption. 

Waste water recycling: review, of equivalent electrical energy intensity and operation of waste 
water treatment plant equipment and technologies. 

Agricultural water use and their energy intensity: Energy intensity of irrigation water use with 
change in crops; change in irrigation technology, subsidy in electricity, human behavior; with 
variation in geographic land scape. 

Case study of water life cycle in various locations: USA, Ontario, Canada, China, Australia, 
India. 

 



Text  books : 

1. C. Sommariva: Desalination Desalination and Advanced Water Treatment: Economics and 
Financing, First ed., Balaban Desalination Publications, Hopkinton, MA, USA, 2010.pg. 103. 

2. A K Plappally and J H Lienhard Energy Requirements for Water Production, Treatment, End 
Use, Reclamation, and Discharge, Renewable and sustainable energy reviews (RSER), 
16(1) 

Self-learning Material: 

1. Sustainable Development: The Water Energy Food Nexus Aachen 
Universityhttps://www.edx.org/course/sustainable-development-the-water-energy-food-
nexus 

2. Water-Energy Nexus Course of Studies at Irvine,https://www.water-energy-
food.org/resources/resources-detail/university-of-california-water-energy-nexus-urse-of-
studies-at-irvine/ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 
 

 
 
 
 

Digital Humanities 
Curriculum  

of  
M.Sc. Program 

 
 

  

 



 

1. Introduction 
 
Master of Science (M.Sc.) in Digital Humanities at IIT Jodhpur is designed to address 
developments, implications, and inflections of digital technologies on historical and 
contemporary culture, and society. To contextualize, disciplinary evolutions of the natural 
sciences, social sciences, the arts and humanities and allied technologies have converged and 
diverged over the centuries. The digital scholarship in the social sciences, the arts and 
humanities is only emerging. One reason for the growth of digitization in the social sciences, 
the arts and humanities is not an emulation of the natural sciences, rather, discovering 
meaning in the application of information technology as an aid to fulfil the disciplines’ basic 
tasks of preserving, reconstructing, transmitting, and interpreting the human record 
historically and contemporaneously. 
 
Given the above, the primary objective of this program is to orient students in the ways in 
which the study of the humanities, social sciences, and similar areas has been transformed 
by the influence of digital technologies and economic compulsions. This confluence of 
disciplines has redefined the contours of the subject of “humanities”. In the present context, 
a critical interrogation into the history of digital approaches to the humanities, modes of 
implementation of digital tools & platforms, issues related to the utilization of big data 
(through database construction, text markup, informatics, statistical analysis to name a few) 
are imperatives in contemporary research in Humanities. This interdisciplinary M.Sc program 
has been tailored to provide such critical insights into the key parameters that are continually 
influencing and impacting the amalgamation of diverse disciplines, especially digital 
technologies with humanities that will re-engineer emerging societal structures and behavior.  
 

2. Objectives of the program 
 
The M.Sc. DH program offers unique opportunities to redraw conventional disciplinary 
boundaries among the humanities, the social sciences, the arts, technology and 
engineering, and the natural sciences. Primary objectives of the program include (but are 
not limited to): 
  

1. Exploring contested definitions of the digital humanities 
2. Exploring debates about the digital humanities within the emerging field 
3. Beginning to consider why the digital humanities matter beyond the academic field 

itself 
4. Through hands-on experimentation, trying out various types of digital humanities 

analysis using heterogeneous datasets, tools, and methods 
  
The students of the program will acquire a systematic understanding of digital humanities 
and the knowledge and skills to independently formulate and solve problems in the area of 
digital humanities which has large scale applications in industry and academia. After 
completion of the program, students will have acquired knowledge that is required for 
advanced work in jobs and organizations invested in digitization and the communication of 
information, documents, and culture occurs. To enhance collaborative workflows, the 
program will actively involve academics and resource people from other institutes and 
universities across the country and abroad. 

 

3. Expected Graduate Attributes 
 
After completing this program, a student will be able to develop an ability to: 
1. In depth understanding of the fundamental concepts of broad areas in Humanities, 

Social Sciences, and application areas of basic computational tools.   

 



 

2. Ability to undertake problems in multidisciplinary domains of Humanities, Social 
Sciences, Computer Sciences, Mathematics, and related disciplines. 

3. Skills to demonstrate basic principles of Humanities and Social Sciences in digital 
domains through various application areas and analytical processes. 

4. Ability to make effective oral and written technical communication. 
5. Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics. 

 

4. Learning Outcomes 
 
The student will have the ability to: 

1.  Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the main field of study and significant in-
depth knowledge in some subcategories of the digital humanities 

2.  Analyze, assess, and manage complex phenomena, questions, and situations related to 
the digital humanities as a field of study and work 

3.  Describe the prospects and limitations of science and technology in digital humanities, 
their role in society, and the individual’s responsibility for how they are used 

 

5. Major Thrust Areas of the M.Sc. Program 
 

The major thrust areas of the M.Sc. DH program are: 
● Archiving 
● Cultural Heritage and Digital Preservation  
● Data Analytics for Social Sciences 
● Data Journalism 
● Digital Marketing 
 

Recommended elective courses for each specialization vertical: 
Archiving Cultural Data Analytics Data Digital 

Heritage for Social Journalism Marketing 
Sciences 

Images, Images, Introduction to New Media Studies New Media Studies 
Imaginations, and Imaginations, and AR/VR 
Digital Cultures Digital Cultures 
Introduction to Introduction to Analysis of Social Analysis of Social Introduction to 
AR/VR Cultural Studies Media Networks Media Networks AR/VR 
Digital Cinema Introduction to Human Factors in Web & Social Media Analysis of Social 

AR/VR Interaction Design Analytics (SME) Media Networks 
Text Analytics Digital Cinema Qualitative and Digital Publishing Game Designing 

Quantitative 
Methodologies 

Theory of Digital Storytelling Big Data and Social Civic writing/ Art, Aesthetics and 
Communication Sciences Contextual the Public (HSS) 

Communication 
Curation Introduction to Marketing Analytics Theory of International 
Technologies Typography Communication Marketing (SME) 
Digital photography Consumer Culture Text Analytics Text Analytics Consumer Behavior 
and videography and Commodities (SME) 
Cultural semiotics Digital photography Game Designing Digital photography Online Marketing 

and videography and videography (SME) 
Performing Arts in Digital Storytelling Computational Crowd Sourcing Innovation & Digital 
Digital Space Social Science Economy (SME) 
Common Ontology Performing Arts in Computational Computational Creating Digital 

Digital Space Economics Social Science Products/Services 
(SME) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 



 

6. Topic Clouds and Mapping of Topic Clouds with 
proposed courses 
 
Table 1. Topics and Mapping of Topic with Courses 
 

Sl. Topics Category Course Title 
No. (Core/ 

Electives) 

1 Introduction and History of DH; Digitization of the Core Foundations of 
Humanities; Usages of digitizations; Data Collection, Meta Digital Humanities 
Data, Social Media Data, Data Curation, Structured and 
Unstructured Data; Ethics in Digital Environments 
(Copyright, Digital Rights, Open Access and Digital 
Knowledge Spaces) 

2 Basic principles and mathematical preliminaries; Core Machine Learning 
Information-based learning; Similarity-based Learning;  for Digital 
Probability-based Learning; Error-based Learning; Humanities 

Unsupervised learning; Case studies and application of 
ML in DH  

3 The digital economy; network infrastructures; Economics Core Principles of 
of platforms; Digital markets; Digitization and Innovation Digital Economics 

4 Discussion on and collective reading of texts, weekly Core Seminar in Digital 
seminar on select issues related to DH Humanities 

5 Fundamentals of Programming and its application in Core Programming 
Numerical Techniques (Root finding methods, Solution for Techniques 
system of linear equations, Power method) 

6 Performance of algorithms, Introduction of Data structures Core Data Structures 
such as linked lists, stacks, queues, trees, binary trees.  and Algorithms 

7  History of Civilizations and role of technology; Narratives Core Civilizations, 
of Progress; Social Construction of Technology - Colonial Cultures, and 
Technology; Diffusion and transfer of technology; Rise of Technologies 
the Internet and Digital Societies; Basics of archaeology 
(concept, methods, practices) 

8  Literary history, literary terms and genres, literary Core Perspectives in 
cultures in history, impact of technology on literature, Language and 
history of publishing, linguistic analysis, discourse Literary Studies 
analysis, semantics, South Asian literatures, oral and print 
cultures in literature 

9 DH as Convergent Practices; DH in Context (Versions of Core Methods and 
DH across the globe, Post-colonial DH, DH in the Global Methodologies in 
South); Methodologies; Offline and Online Data Collection Digital Humanities 
(Surveys, Interviews, Focus Groups, Scraping);  
Qualitative Methods; Quantitative Methods 

 



 

10 Birth of the archive, archive in historical time, archive after Core Archiving and 
the digital revolution, digital surrogate and born digital, Databases 
modes of archiving, audio-visual essay, media collectives, 
digital film archives, emergent modes of exhibition  

11 Client Hardware (Desktop vs. Mobile), Android Core Social Media 
Development, iOS Development, RESTful and Non-RESTful Application 
apps, Creating and Incorporating Web/Cloud Services, Development 
Mobile Sensors, Security and Trust Management, Privacy 
and Ethics, Usability and Accessibility 

12 Socio-Economic Process, Concept Mapping, Intellectual Core Foundations in IPR 
Property Rights (IPR) tools, Patent, Design registrations, 
Trademark, Copyright, Trade Secret, Geographical 
Indications, Protection of New Plant Varieties. Searching 
and scanning IPR databases, Knowledge evolution, 
Societal Issues, Collaborative working. IP Filing process, 
Biodiversity & traditional knowledge, IPR in Trade and 
Commerce 

13 The Production of Space, Identity, Maps, Representation, Core Place and Identity 
and Power; Panoptic Spaces; Spaces of Economic in the Digital Age 
Diversity; Identity from Imagined Communities to Virtual 
Communities, Liveness, Telepresence, Connection and 
Disconnection; National Identity; Transnationalism and 
Diaspora  

14  Visual Cultures; Images as Performative Space; Digital Elective Images, 
media and Global Image; Images, Power, and Resistance; Imaginations, and 
Netnography / Digital Ethnography Digital Cultures 

15  The culture concept, culture industry, media and culture, Elective Introduction to 
culture in the digital age, globalization, mass culture, Cultural Studies 
popular culture, visual and material culture, cultural 
preservation 

16 Introduction to New Media, its theories and histories, its Elective New Media 
social, political and cultural implications; public domain Studies 
and digital commons, network society, online streaming 
and authorship debates, piracy and IP rights; media lab as 
research space; New Media and Indian/global politics  

17  Augmented Reality, Virtual Reality, Mixed Reality, Tools, Elective Introduction to 
Environment, Interactivity, Human factor. AR/VR 

18  Network Concepts, Graph, Connectivity, Software tools, Elective Analysis of Social 
NEtworkX, Pajek Media Networks 

19 End of celluloid, post-cinema, digital cinema and durational Elective Digital Cinema 
principles, slow cinema, emerging domains of exhibition 
and spectatorship, digital film archives and databases, 
streaming platforms and authorship debates, digital 
restoration and preservation, experimental cinema-visual 
art alliance in the days of the digital  

 



 

20  Digital Environment, Application in Teaching, Advertising, Elective Digital Storytelling 
Training, Immersive Environment 

21  Anthropomorphism, Multimodal Interfaces, Cognitive Elective Human Factors in 
aspects, Qualitative and Quantitative Evaluation. Interaction Design 

22 Digital typesetting, Fonts format, Encoding techniques. Elective Introduction to 
Font Families and Formats, Curves, Typographic Principles, Typography 
Symbols, Signs, Accents, Hierarchy and Scale, Tracking 
and Kerning, Rhythm and Composition, (X)HTML, 
Embedding, SVG Social Media FontLab, FontForge, 
Autotracing, Optimization. 

23 Natural Resource Management, Food Security, Agriculture, Elective Climate Change 
Migration, Environment, health, Disasters and Society 

24 Consumption, markets, consumer society, commodity Elective Consumer Culture 
culture, consumption and class, material culture, and Commodities 
overconsumption, consumer citizenship, global 
consumption, commodity flows 

25 Science and Technology studies, Ethnography of a Elective Sociology of 
laboratory, Social construction of reality, Social Science and 
construction of nature, Discrimination in science, Actor Technology 
Network Theory, Anthropology of non-humans, ecological 
understanding of world, Science and technology is colonial 
India, Science and Governance in India, History and 
Philosophy of Science and Technology, Technology and Art 

26 Defining Cine-Politics as a conceptual tool, cinema, cultural Elective Cine Politics under 
politics and political lives in the subcontinent, Indian the National 
National Emergency of 1975-77 and its politico-cultural Emergency 
implications, state sponsorship, film policy and censorship, 
globalization of the dictatorial in the 1970s, digital 
remembering and archiving of evidence  

27 Gender as social construction; Gender in Colonial History; Elective Gender and 
Gender across geo-social scales; Gender and Migration; Society 
Feminisms; Gender, Science, and Technology (Household 
technologies; Medical technologies; Communication 
technologies); Video Games; Imagining and Representing 
Gender 
Gender in Literature and Culture; Postcolonial Studies; 
Normativity, Subversions, and Queer Studies; Global 
Gender Politics 

28 Art and Decadence, Social anthropology and art - the Elective Art, Aesthetics 
theory of Levis Strauss, Art and psychoanalysis - Jacques and the Public 
Lacan, Photography and Deleuze - A thousand plateaus, 
Art and Foucault, Nietzsche and Art. 

29 Approaches to Sociocultural Theories, Relationship Elective Sociocultural 
between self and society; Social integration and Theories 
transformations; Social theories and world affairs; 
Technology, Culture, and Politics 

 



 

30 The topic clouds for the course include contemporary Elective Selected Topics in 
topics in Digital Humanities and may be updated according DH 
to the instructor 

 



 

 7. Curriculum of M.Sc. Digital Humanities 
Table 2. Curriculum of M.Sc. Digital Humanities 
 
Cat. Course Course Title L-T-P- Credit Cat. Course Course Title L-T-P- Credi

Level D s Level D ts 
Semester 1 Semester 2 
C DHL5xx0 Foundations 3-0-2- 4 C DHL5xx Methods and 3-0-2- 4 

of Digital 0 0 Methodologie 0 
Humanities s in Digital 

Humanities 
C MAL5xx0 Programming 2-0-2- 3 C DHL5xx Archiving 3-0-2- 4 

Techniques 0 0 and 0 
Databases 

C DHL6xx0 Perspectives 3-0-0- 3 C DHL5xx Machine 3-0-0- 3 
in Language 0 0 Learning for 0 
and Literary Digital 
Studies Humanities 

C DHL6xx0 Civilizations, 3-0-0- 3 C OAL7XX Foundations 1-0-0- 1 
Cultures, and 0 0 in IPR 0 
Technologies 

C DHL5xx0 Principles of 3-0-0- 3 C DHL5XX Place and 3-0-0- 3 
Digital 0 0 Identity in 0 
Economics the Digital 

Age 
C DHQ5xx0 Seminar 0-0-2- 2 C MAL5XX Data 1-0-2- 2 

1 0 Structures 0 
and 
Algorithms 

     E XXXX PE 1 3-0-0- 3 
0 

   14-0- 18    17-0- 20 
6-1 6-0 

Semester 3 Semester 4 
PE xxxx PE2 3-0-0- 3 PE xxxx PE5 3-0-0- 3 

 0 0 
PE xxxx PE3 3-0-0- 3 PE xxxx PE6 3-0-0- 3 

0  0 
PE xxxx PE4 3-0-0- 3 OE xxxx OE2 3-0-0- 3 
  0 0 
OE xxxx OE1 3-0-0- 3 P DHD7xx Project 2 0-0-0- 10 

0 0 10 
 

P DHD7xx0 Project 1 0-0-0- 5      
5 

C DHP7xx0 Social Media 1-0-2- 2      
Application 0 
Development 

   13-0- 19    9-0-0- 19 
2-5 10 

 
  
  
 
 
  

 



 

8. List of Proposed Courses 
 
Table 3. Program Courses 
 

Sr. No Course Name LTPD Credi Cour Cour
t se se 

Code Level 

Core Courses 

1 Foundations of Digital Humanities 3-0-2-0 4 DH 500 

2 Methods and Methodologies in Digital 3-0-2-0 4 DH 500 
Humanities 

3 Machine Learning for Digital Humanities 3-0-0-0 3 DH 500 

4 Principles of Digital Economics 3-0-0-0 3 DH 500 

5 Place and Identity in the Digital Age 3-0-0-0 3 DH 500 

6 Archiving and Databases 3-0-2-0 4 DH 500 

7 Seminar in Digital Humanities 0-0-2-1 2 DH 500 

8 Programming Techniques 2-0-2-0 3 MA 500 

9 Data Structures and Algorithms 1-0-2-0 2 MA 500 

10  Civilizations, Cultures, and Technologies 3-0-0-0 3 DH 600 

11 Perspectives in Language and Literary 3-0-0-0 3 DH 600 
Studies 

12 Social Media Application Development 1-0-2-0 2 DH 700 

13 Foundations in IPR 1-0-0-0 1 OA 700 

Program Elective Courses 

14 Introduction to Cultural Studies 3-0-0-0 3 DH 700 

15 New Media Studies 3-0-0-0 3 DH 700 

16 Analysis of Social Media Networks 3-0-0-0 3 DH 700 

17 Digital Cinema 3-0-0-0 3 DH 700 

18 Digital Storytelling 3-0-0-0 3 DH 700 

19 Human Factors in Interaction Design 3-0-0-0 3 DH 700 

20 Introduction to Typography 3-0-0-0 3 DH 700 

21 Consumer Culture and Commodities 3-0-0-0 3 DH 700 

 



 

22 Images, Imaginations, and Digital 3-0-0-0 3 DH 700 
Cultures 

23 Selected Topics in DH  3-0-0-0 3 DH 700 

24 Introduction to AR/VR 3-0-0-0 3 CS 700 

25 Sociology of Science and Technology 3-0-0-0 3 HS 700 

26 Gender and Society 3-0-0-0 3 HS 700 

27 Cine Politics under the National 3-0-0-0 3 HS 700 
Emergency  

28 Art, Aesthetics and the Public 3-0-0-0 3 HS 700 

29 Climate Change and Society 3-0-0-0 3 HS 700 

30 Sociocultural Theories 3-0-0-0 3 HS 700 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  

 



 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Detailed Course Content of 
Program Core Courses 

   

 



 

 
Course Title Foundations of Digital Humanities Course No. DHL5XX0 
Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P- 3-0-2-0 

D [C]) [4] 
Offered for M. Sc. (Cr=0); M.Tech. (Cr=0) Type Compulsor

y 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 

1. Explain the broad spectrum and perspectives of Digital Humanities (DH) 
2. Introduce the necessary tools and techniques to understand various DH research 

projects 
 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Understand the transdisciplinary nature of DH    
2. Learn to apply tools for the collection and analysis of data from digital platforms 
3. Understanding the basic ethics of data collection from digital platforms 

 

Contents  
Introduction and History of DH: Intersection of digital technology and humanities 
disciplines; the history of humanities computing – how and why it emerged (7 lectures) 
Digitization of the Humanities: Theoretical Premises; Data in DH, Images and other visual 
cultures (10 lectures) 
Usages of digitizations: Archiving and Databases; Mapping; role of place and space in 
cultural visibility; digital heritage (10 lectures) 
Data Collection: New Media and Digital Platform, Meta Data, Social Media Data, Data 
Curation, Structured and Unstructured Data (10 Lectures) 
Ethics in Digital Environments: Copyright, Digital Rights, Open Access and Digital 
Knowledge Spaces (5 lectures)  
 
Laboratory 

1. Introduction to Digital Tools like TAGS, twXplorer, ngram Viewer, AntConc, 
StoryMap, Voyant 

2. Final Project 
 

Text Books 

1. Eileen Gardiner, Ronald G. Musto (2015), The Digital Humanities: A Primer for 
Students and Scholars, Cambridge University Press. 

2. Chaudhuri, S. (2010), The Metaphysics of Text, Cambridge University Press 
3. Gold, Matthew K. (2012), Debates in the Digital Humanities, University of 

Minnesota Press 
 
Reference Books  

1. Hockey, Susan. (2000), Electronic Texts in the Humanities: Principles and Practice, 
Oxford University Press. 

2. Schreibman, S., Siemens, R., Unsworth, J. (2004), Companion to Digital 
Humanities, Oxford: Blackwell. 

3. Shillingsburg, Peter. (2006), From Gutenberg to Google. Electronic Representations 
of Literary Texts, Cambridge University Press 

 
 

 



 

Course Title Perspectives in Language and Literary Course No. DHL6XX0 
Studies 

Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P-D 3-0-0-0 
[C]) [3] 

Offered for M.Sc. (Cr>=0); M.Tech. (Cr >= 0); Type Compulsor
B.Tech. (Cr>=75) y 

Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 

1. Introduce students to theories of literature. 
2. Introduce students to basic theories of language, linguistics concepts, and literary 

cultures in translation. 
3. Provide the students with a background in the development of computational tools 

for literary analysis 
 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Understand major trajectories in literary thought, trace the evolution of literary 
genres, and contextualize their contemporary significance. 

2. Understand fundamental aspects of language and linguistic analysis.   
3. Critically analyse literary texts using digital tools.       

 
Contents  
History of English Language and Literature: Literary Canon, Historical Events and 
Linguistic Shifts, Impact of technology on evolution of literature (5 lectures) 
Literary Genres: The Epic, Drama, The Advent of the Novel, Poetry (6 lectures) 
Literary Analysis and Criticism: Formalism, Close Reading and Textual Analysis, Structure, 
pattern, motif and metaphor analysis (5 lectures) 
Fundamentals of Linguistics: Language Families, Syntax, Morphology, Phonology, 
Pragmatics (5 lectures) 
Applied Linguistics: Theories of Language and Language Learning, Corpus and Discourse 
Analysis, Digital Tools for Language Learning and Textual Analysis (5 lectures) 
Literary Cultures around the World: American Literature, World Literature, Literatures of 
the Commonwealth, Postcolonial and New Writing, South Asian Literatures (  10 lectures) 
Literature in the Digital Age: Cyberpunk fiction, Steampunk fiction, Science fiction, Digital 
Humanities Tools for Literary Analysis, Discourse and Corpus Analysis with Digital Tools, 
Data driven Literary Analysis (6 lectures) 
 
 
Text Books 

1. Terry Eagleton. 1983. Literary Theory: An Introduction. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press. 

2. Abrams, M.H. A Glossary of Literary Terms. Cengage,2013. 
3. Barry, Peter. Beginning Theory: An Introduction to Literary and Cultural Theory. 

Manchester University Press, 2002.  
4. Sheldon Pollock. 2003. Literary Cultures in History: Reconstructions from South 

Asia. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Self Learning Material 

1. Merin Simi Raj, History of English Language and Literature, Department of 
Humanities and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology-Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109106124/. 

2. Rajesh Kumar and Shreesh Chaudhary, Introduction to Modern Linguistics, 
Department of Humanities and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology-
Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/106/109106080/. 

 



 

3. Sayan Chattopadhyay, Introduction to Literary Theory, Department of Humanities 
and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology-Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/104/109104135/.  
 

 
Course Title Civilizations, Cultures, and Course No. DHL6XX0 

Technologies 
Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P-D 3-0-0-0 

[C]) [3] 
Offered for M.Sc. (Cr>=0); M.Tech. (Cr >= 0); Type Compulsor

B.Tech. (Cr>=75) y 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
 

1. This course introduces students to important historical and sociocultural processes 
that have crafted technologies over time and across civilizations. 

2. Recognize how technological developments are related to socio-cultural values and 
practices and understand the roots of current technological society(ies)  

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Students will be able to appreciate that technology is not an isolated, literate 
enterprise, it rather produces structures, machines, processes, systems that 
impact and inflect societies and civilizations 

 
Contents  
History of Civilizations and role of technology: Classical and Early Modern Philosophy (3 
lectures); Narrative(s) of Progress; Industrial Revolution(s) (5 lectures) 
Industry and Innovation; Culture of Invention; Enlightenment and the Rise of Modern 
Science (6 lectures) 
Social Construction of Technology - Colonial Technology (Race, Gender, Sciences and 
Technology) (6 lectures); Communication, Transportation and the changing world (4 
lectures); Diffusion of Technologies and transfer of technology globally (4 lectures) 
The Development of the Computer Industry; Rise of the Internet and Digital Society; 
Industrialization, Commodification and the Environment (5 lectures); Biotechnology (3 
lectures) 
Future of Science and Technology in the society and their changing relationship (6 
lectures) 

Text Books 

1. Pacey, Arnold. Technology in World Civilization, 4th ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2001. 

2. Volti, Rudi, Society and Technological Change, 4th ed. New York: Worth Publishers, 
2001 
  

Self Learning Material 
 

1. Digital Humanities Seminar Video Archive of the Open University, UK, 
http://www.open.ac.uk/arts/research/digital-humanities/videos  

 
 
  

 



 

Course Title Methods and Methodologies in Digital Course No. DHL5XX0 
Humanities 

Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P-D 3-0-2-0 [4] 
[C]) 

Offered for M. Sc. (Cr=0); M.Tech. (Cr=0) Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 

1. Demonstrate in depth knowledge of selected methodologies related to DH 
2. Introduce and explore avenues of new and emerging societal and cultural entities in 

DH 
3. Introduce several qualitative and quantitative tools for DH projects 

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Understand DH as a convergent array of practices. 
2. Understand what DH means in different contexts 
3. Capture, collect, and analyse a variety of data types related to DH project  

 
Contents  
DH as Convergent Practices: Digital methods in and about philosophy, society, culture, and 
language (5 Lectures)  
DH in Context and Approaches (Theory and Methods): Versions of DH across the globe, 
Post-colonial DH, DH in the Global South ( 5 lectures) 
Methodologies: Constructing Research Questions for a variety of disciplinary contexts (for 
e.g. in new media, social studies, mass communication and journalism, digital heritage) (7 
lectures) 
Offline and Online Data Collection: Surveys, Interviews, Focus Groups, Scraping (6 
Lectures) 
Qualitative Methods:  Descriptive, Topic and Thematic Coding, Data analysis through NVivo 
and MaxQDA; (10 Lectures) 
Quantitative Methods: Introduction to statistical techniques, and using of statistical tools 
(SPSS, STATA); Network Analysis (9 lectures) 
 
Laboratory 

1. Introduction to Digital Tools like Tableau, ArcGIS, SocioViz, NetVizz, MaxQDA, NVivo 
2. Final Project 

Text Books 

1. Patricia Leavy (2017), Research design: Quantitative, qualitative, mixed methods, 
arts-based, and community-based participatory research approaches. Guilford 
Publications 

2. P.L. Arthur & K. Bode (2014) Advancing digital humanities: Research, methods, 
theories. London: Palgrave Macmillan 

3. Lewis Levenberg, Tai Neilson, David Rheams (2018), Research Methods for the 
Digital Humanities: Palgrave Macmillan 

Reference Books 
1. Johnny Saldana (2015), The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers, SAGE 

Publishing 
2. Alexander Loth (2019), Visual Analytics with Tableau, John Wiley & Sons 

  
Self Learning Material 

1. Data Visualization (NPTEL): https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eFByJkA3ti4 
 
 

 



 

 
Course Title Principles of Digital Economics Course No. DHL5XX0 
Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P-D 3-0-0-0 

[C]) [3] 
Offered for M. Sc. (Cr=0); M.Tech. (Cr=0) Type Compulsor

y 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
 

1. Explain the basic theory in digital economics, including network effects, value 
creation models, digital business models and market modeling. 

2. Introduce how the digital economy influences societies, environment, regulations, 
privacy, strategy, and financial operations. 

 
Learning Outcomes 
 

1. To get broad knowledge in digital economics and how the digital economy impacts 
its surroundings. 

2. To perform network effect analysis of a value network and construct a business 
model. 

 
Contents  
Introduction: The Digital Economy, The Productivity Paradox, ICT, Growth and 
Productivity (6 lectures) 
Network Infrastructures: Broadband Networks and the Transition to Fiber, The Relations 
between Network Operators in the Internet: Peering, Transit, and Net Neutrality (6 
lectures) 
Network Effects and Standards: Network Effects, Standard Wars (6 lectures) 
The Economics of Multi-Sided Platforms, Economics of Platforms: The Basics, Reseller vs. 
Platform: The Choice of Business Model (6 lectures) 
Digital Markets: Competition between E-retailers and Brick & Mortars, Business Models of 
Digital Goods 
Personal Data, Price Discrimination and Privacy: Personal Data and Price Discrimination, 
The Cost of Privacy and the Privacy Paradox (6 lectures) 
Experience Goods, Online Reviews and Recommender Systems: Search Goods and 
Experience Goods, Online Reviews and Recommender Systems (6 lectures) 
Digitization and Innovation: Intellectual Property in the ICT Sector: The Effect of 
Digitization on Innovation: Crowdsourcing and Crowdfunding (6 lectures) 

Text Books 

1. Eric Brousseau, Nicolas Curien (2007); Internet and Digital Economics: Principles, 
Methods and Applications. Cambridge University Press. 

2. Cellini P. (2007); Internet Economics: Understanding Digital and New Media 
Markets, Luiss University Press. 

3. Luc Soete, Bas Ter Weel (2006); The Economics of the Digital Society, Edward 
Elgar Pub. 

 
Self Learning Material 
 

1. E-Business, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/110/105/110105083/ 
  

 
 

 



 

 
 
Course Title Archiving and Databases Course No. DHL5XX0 
Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P-D 3-0-2-0 

[C]) [4] 
Offered for M. Sc. (Cr=0); M.Tech. (Cr=0) Type Compulsor

y 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 

1. Developing an understanding of the archive and its evolution in historical time till 
the days of the digital revolution 

2. Exploring digital cinema and media, audio-visual essay, media collectives, and 
digital film archives 

3. Tracing the trajectory of older information systems till the advent of the database 
with select case studies of the latter  

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Develop greater familiarity with the philosophical and historical nuances of the 
archive 

2. Become acquainted with the contemporary forms of digital archive, artwork, 
cinema, works of media collectives and their modes of exhibition 

3. Have an understanding of database as an emerging mode of information network  
 
Contents  
Archive and Its Evolution: Introducing archive (2 lectures), Archive in historical time (5 
lectures), politics and poetics of archiving (5 lectures), archive in the digital age (2 
lectures)  
Cinema and The Archive: Film archives (5 lectures), digital age and post-cinema (5 
lectures), the end/future of celluloid (4 lectures) 
Contemporary Art and The Emergent Space: Archive, art museums, installation art, audio-
visual essay, media collectives and their practices, digital archive, case studies of digital 
film archiving initiatives, film databases (7 lectures) 
Exhibition and Authorship: modes of exhibition and questions concerning authorship, 
piracy, law and the image (7 lectures)  

Text Books 

1. Friedrich, M., (2018), The Birth of the Archive: A History of Knowledge, University 
of Michigan Press.  

2. Ernst, W., (2013), Digital Memory and the Archive, University of Minnesota Press.  
3. Grau, O., Coones, W., and Ruhse, V., (eds.) (2017), Museum and Archive on the 

Move: Changing Cultural Institutions in the Digital Era, De Gruyter.   
 
Self Learning Material 
 

1. Indian Cinema, https://indiancine.ma/   
 

 
 

 
  

 



 

Course Title Machine Learning for Digital Course No. DHL5XX0 
Humanities 

Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P-D 3-0-0-0 
[C]) [3] 

Offered for M. Sc. (Cr=0); M.Tech. (Cr=0) Type Compulsor
y 

Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 

1. Introduce and explore a broad spectrum of perspectives in Machine Learning (ML) 
2. Develop familiarity with a range of ML algorithms as applicable for Digital 

Humanities (DH) 
3. Develop an understanding of software tools to implement ML  algorithms 

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Identify best-fit techniques for related research questions and data in DH 
2. Basic ability to design, test and interpret ML models for DH 

 

Contents  
Introduction: Basic principles and mathematical preliminaries (5 Lectures) 
Information-based learning: Decision Tree, ID3, ensemble learning (4 Lectures) 
Similarity-based Learning: Feature space, Similarity measure, Nearest Neighbor, Feature 
selection (4 Lectures) 
Probability-based Learning: Baye’s theorem, Bayesian Learning, Probability density 
function, Binning, Bayesian Networks (6 Lectures) 
Error-based Learning: Linear Regression, Support vector machines, Neural Networks 
(Perceptrons, Multilayer Network, Back Propagation) (9 Lectures) 
Unsupervised learning: Clustering (K-means, Hierarchical), Dimensionality Reduction (4 
Lectures) 
Case studies and application of ML in DH  (10 Lectures) 

Text Book 

1. Richard O. Duda, Peter E. Hart, David G. Stork. Pattern Classification (John Wiley & 
Sons) 

2. John D. Kelleher, Brian Mac Namee, Aoife D’Arcy (2015), Fundamentals of Machine 
Learning for Predictive Data Analytics, (MIT Press). 

Self Learning Material 

1. Introduction to Machine Learning (NPTEL): 
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLIg1dOXc_acbdJo-
AE5RXpIM_rvwrerwR 
 

2. Introduction to Machine Learning (NPTEL): 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r4sgKrRL2Ys&list=UUpGt_NffD1LUvX3fFErj_Q
A 

 
  

 



 

Course Title Place and Identity in the Digital Age Course No. DHL5XX0 
Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P-D 3-0-0-0 

[C]) [3] 
Offered for M. Sc. (Cr=0); M.Tech. (Cr=0) Type Compulsor

y 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 

1. To familiarize students with the intersection of what have undoubtedly become two 
“keywords” that transcend most social science disciplines in the digital age: place 
and identity. 

2. Students will gain ideas of the role that place has in the formation of all types of 
identities – not just those of individual subjects and groups, but of regions, 
institutions, practices and even ecosystems.   
 

Learning Outcomes 
1. Students will learn to investigate the relationship between the production of space, 

practices of place, and embodied identity. The relationship between these 
categories has taken on a new level of importance with the emergence of digital 
technologies, as seen in both academic studies and in the broader cultural climate.  

2. Students will learn topics that are situated at the intersection of space, place, 
identity, and digital technology such as mapping and power, location-aware and 
pervasive technologies, surveillance, virtuality, telepresence, empire in the digital 
age, transnational identity, and diaspora in an age of global connectivity. 

 
Contents  
Defining Space, Place, and Identity: The Production of Space (7 lectures); Identity and 
Space (7 lectures) 
Practices of Representation: Mapping and Pervasive Computing (3 lectures); Maps, 
Representation, and Power; Panoptic Spaces (6 lectures); Spaces of Economic Diversity (5 
lectures) 
Identity from Imagined Communities to Virtual Communities: Imaginative Geographies (3 
lectures); The Virtual and the Actual; Liveness, Telepresence, and Embodied Connectivity 
(5 lectures); Connection and Disconnection; National Identity; Transnationalism and 
Diaspora (6 lectures) 
 
Text Books 

1. Lefebvre, Henri. The Production of Space. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 1992.  
ISBN: 0631181776. 

2. Massey, Doreen. For Space.  Sage Publications, Ltd.  2005 
3. Hubbard, Phil; and Kitchin, Rob.   Key Thinkers on Space and Place (Second 

Edition).   Sage Publications Ltd. 2010.  

Reference Book 
1. Anderson, Benedict. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread 

of Nationalism (New York: Verso Books, 1983/2006). ISBN: 978-1844670864 

 

 
  

 



 

Course Title Social Media Application Development Course No. DHP7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P-D 1-0-2-0 

[C]) [2] 
Offered for Ph.D. (Cr>=0); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); M.Tech. Type Compulsor

(Cr>=0); B.Tech. (Cr>=100) y 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 

1. Developing an understanding of the Mobile Application development framework 
2. Creation of mobile solutions for various modern platforms, including major mobile 

operating systems.  

 
Learning Outcomes 
 

1. Familiarity with cross platform mobile application development techniques 
2. Develop cross platform, interactive applications.  

 
Contents  

Client Hardware (Desktop vs. Mobile) (2 Lectures) 

Android Development, iOS Development, RESTful and Non-RESTful apps (5 Lectures) 

Creating and Incorporating Web/Cloud Services, Mobile Sensors (4 Lectures) 

Security and Trust Management, Privacy and Ethics, Usability and Accessibility (3 
lectures) 

Laboratory 

1. Introduction to Android.O Xcode tour/Swift4 
2. User Interface design with various layout models 
3. State and Event handling 
4. Fragments and Intents 
5. Building data driven apps 
6. Building and Distributing 
7. Building apps for wear devices 
8. Building Games 
9. Virtual reality overview 
10. Multiple devices and APIs 
11. App store optimization  

Text Books 

1. Dusty Phillips (2014), Creating Apps with Kivy, O’Reilly Media. 
2. Roberto Ulloa (2015), Kivy, Interactive Applications and Games in Python, Packt 

Publishing 

  
Self Learning Material 
 

1. Python Programming Resources: https://pythonprogramming.net/      
 
 

 



 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Detailed Course Content of 
Program Elective Courses  

 



 

 
Course Title New Media Studies Course No. DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P-D 3-0-0-0 

[C]) [3] 
Offered for Ph.D. (Cr>=0); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); M.Tech. Type Elective 

(Cr>=0); B.Tech. (Cr>=100) 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
 

1. Help students in exploring the various possibilities offered by New Media and their 
impact on social, political and cultural domains   

2. Create an understanding of concepts such as piracy, rights and the digital 
commons 

3. Make students aware of the implications of New Media and the digital image for the 
public lives in India 

 
Learning Outcomes 
 

1. Develop a sustained interest in new media and its global politics 
2. Formulate an informed acquaintance with the network society 
3. Make a South Asian/Indian intervention into the field  

 
Contents  
 
New Media and Its Aftermath: Histories of New Media (3 lectures), politics of New Media 
(3 lectures), New Media research (4 lectures)  
Public Domain and The Digital Commons: Digital Commons, copyright and IP, piracy (5 
lectures), online streaming, fan-subbing and ownership/authorship debates (5 lectures) 
Network and Cyber-Culture: Cyber-culture, video games, digital image and social media, 
media lab as research space (7 lectures)  
New Media in Indian politics: Indian media economy (10 lectures), New Media, changing 
forms of politics and electoral behavior in India (5 lectures)  

Text Books 

1. Athique, A., Parthasarathi, V., and Srinivas, S. V., (eds.) (2018), The Indian Media 
Economy, Oxford University Press. 

2. Sundaram, R., (2010), Pirate Modernity: Media Urbanism in Delhi, Routledge.   
3. Manovich, L., (2016), Instagram and Contemporary Image, Web. 
4. Manovich, L., (2001), The Language of New Media, MIT Press.  

Self Learning Material 

1. MIT Media Lab, https://www.media.mit.edu/ 
 

 
 
  

 



 

Course Title Introduction to Cultural Studies Course No. DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P-D 3-0-0-0 [3] 

[C]) 
Offered for Ph.D. (Cr>=0); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); M.Tech. Type Elective 

(Cr>=0); B.Tech. (Cr>=100) 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 

1. Teach cultural studies as an interdisciplinary field which draws from and contributes to 
literature, media studies, cultural anthropology, and sociology amongst other disciplines. 

2. Equip students with methods and frameworks to look at the central preoccupations of the 
field – identity, power, economy, culture, aesthetics, and social institutions. 

3. Critically interrogate the benefits of cultural studies for both inter- and intra-disciplinary 
work. 

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Understand major theories relating to historical and emergent ideas of culture and social 
thought. 

2. Investigate processes of cultural production, consumption, and preservation using 
conceptual tools from the field of cultural studies.   

3. Contextualize the role, applications, and significance of culture in the digital age. 
 
Contents  
Culture in the 19th and 20th centuries: The Emergence of the Culture Concept, Evolution of 
Culture, Culture and the Industrial Revolution (5 lectures), The Culture Industry (Value and 
Meaning), Culture as Commodity (Mass Culture) (5 lectures) 
Culture and Politics: Aesthetics and Politics, National Culture, Cultural Semiotics and Political Life 
(5 lectures) Cultural Economy, Political Society (5 lectures) 
Culture and Pedagogy: Culture and the Disciplines - Literary Studies, Anthropology, Sociology, 
History, Linguistics/Philology, Visuality Studies, Political Science (6 lectures), Understanding the 
Two Cultures - Natural and Human Sciences, Addressing the Pedagogical and Intellectual Divide 
(5 lectures)  
Culture and Contemporary Life: Mapping the City, Urban Lives and Cultures (5 lectures), 
Knowledge Society, Technology, Precarity, Virtuality, Representation and Alternate Realities, 
Culture and Big Data (6 lectures) 
Text Books 

1. Simon During. 1993. The Cultural Studies Reader. London: Routledge. 
2. Toby Miller. 2001. A Companion to Cultural Studies. Malden: Blackwell. 
3. Tom Boellstorff. 2015. Coming of Age in Second Life. Princeton: Princeton University 

Press. 
4. Tejaswini Niranjana and Wang Xiaoming (eds.) 2015. Genealogies of the Asian Present: 

Situating Inter-Asia Cultural Studies. New Delhi: Orient Blackswan. 
5. Andrew Milner. 1994. Contemporary Cultural Theory: An Introduction. London: University 

College London Press: London. 
Self Learning Material 

1. Avishek Parui. Introduction to Cultural Studies, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Humanities and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology-Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/106/109106136/. 

2. Liza Das. Cultural Studies, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Humanities and Social 
Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology-Guwahati, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/103/109103019/. 

3. http://culturalstudiesnow.blogspot.com/ 
 

  

 



 

Course Title Images, Imaginations, and Digital Course No. DHL7XX0 
Cultures 

Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P-D 3-0-0-0 
[C]) [3] 

Offered for Ph.D. (Cr>=0); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); M.Tech. Type Elective 
(Cr>=0); B.Tech. (Cr>=100) 

Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 

1. To familiarise students with the process of seeing as a social construct to explore 
the ways we produce, identify, understand, and consume images by studying 
visual materials from different historical and cultural milieu 

2. To introduce students to how photography and images across time and space 
change visual discourse and people’s lives 

3. By contextualising everyday visual culture within larger social debates around 
power, politics, identity and resistance, this course aims to create a consciousness 
about the communicative power of visual images, and to equip students with 
interpretive tools for the evaluation of images. 

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Students will be able to develop a sociological imagination of visual cultures and its 
impact on society 

2. Students will be able to assemble a multi-perspective analysis of a given 
sociocultural issue related to images against local, global, international, and 
intercultural background 

3. Map historical photographic concepts to current digital references.  

Contents  
Images, Imaginations, and Cultures; Photographs and other images as objects (of 
imagination) influencing cultures; Photography as a technology of the colonial state and  
as a transformation instrument of body politic (5 lectures); Race, Gender, Caste and other 
intersectionalities imagined in photographs and other images; Postcards (5 lectures) 
Visual Cultures and the Process of ‘Seeing’: Subject-Object debate; Power, Knowledge and 
the Gaze (Imaging the ‘Other’), Visual discourse; object-subject debate; space and 
visibility (5 lectures); Visual Cultures and Critical Theory (Foucault, Lacan, Derrida, 
Barthes) (5 lectures) 
Images as Performative Space: Power, Knowledge and the ‘Gaze’ determining 
photographs and their power (5 lectures); Imaging the ‘Other’: Orientalism; class 
construction through photography (5 lectures) 
Images and Mobilities: Maps and transportation representing physical, social and 
imaginative worlds (5 lectures) 
Netnography/ Digital ethnography (3 lectures) 
The future of Images; Images and the digital revolution - the road ahead (4 lectures) 

Reference Books 
1. Karlekar, Malavika., (2013), Visual Histories: Photography in the Popular 

Imagination, Oxford University Press 
2. Chaudhary, Zahid R., (2012), Afterimage of Empire: Photography in Nineteenth-

Century India, University of Minnesota Press 
3. Benjamin, Walter. 1936 (2008). The Age of Art in the Age of Mechanical 

Reproduction. London: Penguin. 
4. Nakamura, Lisa. 2008. Digitizing Race: Visual Cultures of the Internet. Minneapolis: 

University of Minnesota Press. 
5. Malek Alloula, 1986, The Colonial Harem, University of Minnesota Press 

Self Learning Material 

 



 

1. Digital Humanities Seminar Video Archive of the Open University, UK, 
http://www.open.ac.uk/arts/research/digital-humanities/videos 

   
  

 



 

 
Course Title Analysis of Social Media Course No. DHL7XX0 

Networks 
Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P- 3-0-0-0 [3] 

D [C]) 
Offered for Ph.D. (Cr>=0); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); Type Elective 

M.Tech. (Cr>=0); B.Tech. 
(Cr>=100) 

Prerequisite None Anti-requisite Social Networks, Social 
Network Analysis 

Objectives 
1. The course introduces social network analysis, its mathematical foundations, and 

analyzing tools (Pajek or NodeXL or UCINET or Others). 
2. Students will be introduced to different types of online networks and how to use them to 

answer social, economic, and other queries. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 

1. Students will be able to acquire social media data, formulate a hypothesis, and find an 
answer out of network data. 

 
Contents  
Introduction: Overview and Aspects of Networks, Ego Network, Characteristics of Social 
Networks. (3 Lectures) 
Mathematical Foundation for Social Network Analysis: Graphs, Matrices. (4 Lectures) 
Network Data: Sources, Sampling and bounding, Ethical considerations, and Collection 
Techniques. (4 Lectures) 
Network Data Management: Data format, Import, Cleaning, Transformation, Export, Visualization 
(3 Lectures) 
Information Diffusion Analysis: Centrality and Network Value, Influence, Epidemics Modeling (3 
Lectures) 
Clustering and Grouping: Community detection, election campaign analysis. (3 Lectures) 
Networks in Their Surrounding Contexts: Homophily, Affiliation, Behaviour Modeling (3 Lectures) 
Markets and Strategic Interaction in Networks: Network Models of Markets, Bargaining and Power 
in Networks, Sponsored Search Markets, Network Effects and Economy (5 Lectures) 
Voting: Group Decision-Making, Information Aggregation (3 Lectures) 
Case Studies: Wiki Networks, YouTube, Flickr, Twitter, Facebook, Email Communication Network, 
Thread Network (11 Lectures) 

Text Books 

1. David Easley and Jon Kleinberg (2013), Networks, Crowds, and Markets: Reasoning 
About a Highly Connected World, Cambridge University Press. 

2. S. Borgatti, M. Everett and J.C. Johnson (2013), Analyzing Social Networks, Sage. 
3. Derek L. Hansen, Ben Shneiderman and Marc A (2011), Analyzing Social Media Networks 

with NodeXL, Morgan Kaufmann  
Reference Books 

1. Albert-Laszlo Barabasi (2016), Network Science, Cambridge University Press. 
2. Mark Newman (2018), Networks, Oxford University Press  
3. Wouter de Nooy, Andrej Mrvar, Vladimir Batagelj (2018), Exploratory Social Network 

Analysis with Pajek, Cambridge University Press 
Self Learning Material 

1. Complex Networks, https://www.barabasilab.com/course  
2. NPTEL Lecture, Social Networks https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106169/# 

Course Title Digital Cinema Course No. DHL7XX0 

 



 

Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P-D 3-0-0-0 [3] 
[C]) 

Offered for Ph.D. (Cr>=0); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); M.Tech. Type Elective 
(Cr>=0); B.Tech. (Cr>=100) 

Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
 

1. Help in exploring various democratic possibilities offered by digital cinema 
2. Create an understanding of the digital in the domain of exhibition and spectatorship 
3. Create an understanding of the digital platforms for cinema-visual art collaborations 

 
Learning Outcomes 
 

1. Sustain an interest in digital cinema, its liberating principles and politics 
2. Develop an informed acquaintance with the experimental cinema-visual art alliance in the 

days of the digital 
3. Understand the implications of the digital for non-industrial film forms  

 
Contents  
The End/Future of Celluloid: Concepts and historical debates (3 lectures), introducing digital (2 
lectures), post-cinema as a concept (2 lectures) 
Digital Cinema and Durational Principles: Durational principle in the days of the digital (5 
lectures), slow cinema as a concept and resultant debates (10 lectures) 
Spectatorship and Authorship: streaming platforms and authorship debates (5 lectures), new 
festivals and exhibition spaces, screen dynamics and high definition image, emergent forms of 
spectatorship (5 lectures) 
Emergent Forms: digital film archives and databases (5 lectures), experimental cinema, visual 
art, and the digital (3 lectures), the politics of the digital (2 lectures) 

Text Books 

1. Koch, G., Pantenburg, V., and Rothohler, S., (eds.) (2012), Screen Dynamics: Mapping 
the Borders of Cinema, Austrian Film Museum. 

2. Torlasco, D., (2013), The Heretical Archive: Digital Memory at the End of Film, University 
of Minnesota Press.   

3. Denson, S., and Leyda, J., (2016), Post-Cinema: Theorizing 21st-Century Film, Reframe 
Books.  
 

  

 



 

  
Course Title Consumer Culture and Commodities Course No. DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P-D 3-0-0-0 

[C]) [3] 
Offered for Ph.D. (Cr>=0); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); M.Tech. Type Elective 

(Cr>=0); B.Tech. (Cr>=100) 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 

1. Facilitate students to understand and critically investigate consumption in 
contemporary, urban life. 

2. Acquaint students with theories that will help them locate consumption vis-à-vis 
sociocultural contexts, identities, and markets. 

3. Elaborate key areas of consumption such as shopping spaces and experiences, 
domesticity, advertising, tourism and fashion using examples from the Indian 
context. 

Learning Outcomes 
1. Understand major concepts and theories in consumption and consumer culture. 
2. Investigate processes of consumption empirically in various aspects of 

contemporary life.  
3. Understand key political and moral concerns around consumption regarding 

ecology, sustainability, and socio-economic class. 
 
Contents  
Understanding Consumption: Theories of consumption, mass consumption, commodity 
culture, consumerism (6 lectures), Consumption and Class, Leisure Consumption, Habitus, 
Cultural Capital and Consumption (5 lectures) 
Objects, Materials and Social Contexts: Subject-object distinctions, ontology of things, 
human-nonhuman interactions, anthropology of material culture (6 lectures), theories of 
matter and materiality, thing theory, study of objects (5 lectures)  
Media and Consumerism: Advertising, consumption, media industry, branding and 
commoditization (5 lectures) 
Consumption in the Indian context: Economic liberalization, rise of the Indian middle-class 
lifestyles, conspicuous consumption in the Indian context (5 lectures)  
Consumer Citizenship: Overconsumption and hoarding, who is the Consumer Citizen, 
Ecological Citizenship, Ecohabitus, Consumption and Environment (5 lectures) 
Consumption in the Digital Age: Materiality in the digital era, the problem of stuff in the 
digital age, online consumer citizenship, hashtag politics (5 lectures) 
Text Books 

1. Sassatelli, R., (2007), Consumer culture: History, theory and politics, Sage. 
2. Miller, D., (1987), Material Culture and Mass Consumption. 1st Edition, Wiley-

Blackwell. 
Reference Books 

1. Douglas, M. and Isherwood,B., (1996), The World of Goods: Towards an 
Anthropology of Consumption, Routledge. 

2. Corrigan, P., (1997), The Sociology of Consumption, Sage. 
3. Appadurai, A., (1986), The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural 

Perspective, 1st Edition, Cambridge University Press. 
4. Falk, P, and Campbell, C., (eds.). (1997), The Shopping Experience, Sage. 

Self Learning Material 
1. Consumer Culture, https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/social-

sciences/consumer-culture 
2. NPTEL Lecture, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/110/105/110105074/ 
3. NPTEL Lecture, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/107/109107139/ 

 

 



 

Course Title Digital Storytelling Course No. DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P-D 3-0-0-0 

[C]) [3] 
Offered for Ph.D. (Cr>=0); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); M.Tech. Type Elective 

(Cr>=0); B.Tech. (Cr>=100) 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
 

1. Understand and examine the new tenets of storytelling in the digital age through 
thoughtful analysis of trends, topics, consumption and digital tools used. 

2. Analyze the changing roles of storytellers for news, businesses and nonprofit 
organizations. 

3. Increase ability to come up with big, original ideas and creatively. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 

1. Develop a deeper sense of why and how we create and value stories 
2. Learn about the ways digital communication technologies can expand and enhance 

narrative techniques 
3. Develop narrative technique and the ways digital elements can interact with 

traditional written narratives to change the ways an audience experiences story 
4. Learn how to match narrative techniques to an audience 

 
Contents  
 
New Technologies, Creative Opportunities: Evolution, Digital Entertainment, Convergence 
(4 Lectures) 
Creating Story-Rich Projects: Interactivity, Character Dialogue, Emotion (6 lectures), 
Social Media, Transmedia, Project creation (6 lectures) 
Harnessing Digital Storytelling for Pragmatic Goals: Teaching, Advertising, Training (9 
Lectures) 
Media and Models: Mobile Device and Applications, Video Games (6 lectures), Interactive 
Cinema, Interactive TV, Electronic Kiosks, Immersive Environments (6 lectures) 
Digital Storytelling Tools (5 Lectures) 

Text Book 

1. C.H., Miller, Digital Storytelling, A Creator’s Guide to Interactive Entertainment, 
Focal Press, 2004 

Reference Books 

1. Seth Gitner, (2015), Multimedia Storytelling for Digital Communicators in a 
Multiplatform World, Routledge Publishers.  

2. Joe Lambert (2013), Digital storytelling capturing lives, creating community, 
Routledge Publishers. 
 

  
 
 
 
 
  
 

 



 

Course Title Human Factors in Interaction Design Course No. DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P-D 3-0-0-0 

[C]) [3] 
Offered for Ph.D. (Cr>=0); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); M.Tech. Type Elective 

(Cr>=0); B.Tech. (Cr>=100) 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
 

1. Introduce the study of human-computer interaction and user interface design. 
2. Explain theoretical understanding of the field and some practical UI design skills. 

 
Learning Outcomes 
 

1. Develop prototypes based on the interaction design principles.   
2. Participate as usability testers in evaluating the designs of others. 

 
Contents  
 
Introduction: Definitions, Interaction Design Principles, Paradigms, Vision, Theory, Models, 
Frameworks (5 Lectures) 
Introduction to human factors: Role of psychology, physiology in interaction design, 
Human Factors Perspective, Cognitive Aspects (5 Lectures) 
Social and Emotional Interaction: Conversation, Remote Interaction, Co-presence, 
Expressive Interface, Emotion Design, Anthropomorphism (8 Lectures) 
Interfaces: Types of Interface, natural Interface (5 Lectures), Multimodal, Wearables, 
Brain Computer Interface (5 Lectures) 
Data Gathering and Analytics: Data Collection Techniques, Quantitative and Qualitative 
Analysis, Data at Scale (7 Lectures) 
Evaluation Techniques: Types of Evaluation, Usability Testing, Analytics and A/B testing, 
Predictive Models (7 Lectures) 

Text Book 

1. Sharp, H, Y, Rogers, J, Preece, INTERACTION DESIGN beyond human-computer 
interaction, John Wiley & Sons (2019) 

Reference Books 

1. Ratner, Julie (ed); Human factors and web development; Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associated (2003) 

2. Sanders, Mark S; McCormick, Ernest J; Human factors in engineering and design, 
McGraw Hill (1993) 

3. Zunse, Leonard; Visual perception of form; Academic Press (1990)  
4. Journal of Human Computer Interaction 

 
Self Learning Material 
 

1. NPTEL Lecture, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106/103/106103220/ 
2. NPTEL Lecture, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106/106/106106177/ 

 
  

 



 

 
Course Title Introduction to Typography Course No. DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P-D 3-0-0-0 

[C]) [3] 
Offered for Ph.D. (Cr>=0); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); M.Tech. Type Elective 

(Cr>=0); B.Tech. (Cr>=100) 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 
 

1. Introduce the evaluation of various types 
2. Explain the elements and principles of design as they relate to type 
3. Explain the use of technical, aesthetic and conceptual understanding of typography 

in practical scenarios 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 

1. Develop the ability to understand, recognize and apply the elements and principles 
of typography and typographic hierarchy 

2. Develop typesetting techniques through the use of industry-standard software 
(Adobe Illustrator, Adobe PhotoShop, Adobe InDesign) 

3. Develop an understanding of interactive and digital multimedia communication in 
relation to typography 

 
Contents  
 
Introduction: Digital typesetting, Fonts format, Encoding techniques. (2 Lectures) 
Font Families and Formats: Unicode, Non-Unicode, Post-Script, True type, Open type, 
Compact Font, Meta Font, Indic (8 Lectures) 
Curves: Hermite, B-Spline, Bezier Curve, NURBS, properties, algorithms, subdivision (10 
Lectures) 
Typographic Principles: Letter, Word, Paragraph, Page (4 Lectures) 
Typographic Details: Symbols, Signs, Accents, Hierarchy and Scale, Tracking and Kerning, 
Rhythm and Composition (5 Lectures) 
Web Typography: (X)HTML, Embedding,  SVG (5 Lectures) 
Editing and Creating Font: Principles, FontLab, FontForge, Autotracing, Optimization (8 
Lectures) 

Text Books 

1. Steven G. Krantz (2003), Handbook of Typography for the Mathematical Sciences, 
CRC Press 

2. Yannis Haralambous, P. Scott Horne (2007), Fonts and Encodings: From Unicode to 
Advanced Typography, O'Reilly Media 

3. Ellen Lupton (2004), Thinking With Type, Princeton Architectural Press. 
 

 
  

 



 

Course Title Selected Topics in DH Course No. DHL7XX0 
Department IDRP-DH Structure (L-T-P-D 3-0-0-0 

[C]) [3] 
Offered for Ph.D. (Cr>=0); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); M.Tech. Type Elective 

(Cr>=0); B.Tech. (Cr>=100) 
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 

1. Introduce the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of DH 
 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of DH 
 
Contents  

The topic cloud for the course include contemporary topics in DH and may be updated 
according to the instructor. 

Text Book 

Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

Self Learning Material 
 
Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

 

 



 

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

 

   

 

 

 

 

PG Course Booklet 

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

July 2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Department of Physics 

 

Two-year M.Sc. Programme 

 

Curriculum 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

Introduction 

Physics is one of the oldest disciplines of Science dealing with the development of a number of 
theories that attempt to explain the origin of the Universe and also various forces that exist in 
nature. Further, the genesis of most of the Engineering Disciplines is based on various principles 
and theories of physics. Hence, the subject of physics, on one side deals with the development of 
fundamental theories towards revealing various processes and forces in nature and on the other 
hand, it seamlessly interfaces with almost all disciplines of engineering wherein outcome of the 
research in physics can be translated into useful technologies and products thereby immensely 
contributing to the wellbeing of mankind. 

Objective of the Programme 

The major objective of the programme is to bring out professionals having knowledge of basic laws 
of nature together with strong fundamentals in the core area of physics viz. Classical Mechanics, 
Quantum Mechanics, Condensed Matter Physics, Electromagnetism, Computational Physics, 
Statistical Physics, Electronics, Atomic and Nuclear Physics and advanced level topics such as 
Quantum Information Processing, Quantum Computing, High Energy Physics, Astrophysics, Plasma 
Physics, Nanotechnology, Nonlinear Optics, etc. Further objective of the program is to inculcate 
certain specific enabling skill sets to prepare the students to take up challenges in any one or more 
functional domains viz. (i) Academics; (ii) Basic and Applied Research; (iii) Research & 
Development; (iv) Engineering & Technology and (v) Industry. 

Expected Graduate Attributes 

1. In depth understanding of the fundamental concepts of physics.  
2. Ability to undertake problems in multidisciplinary domains of Science & Technology viz. 

Space Science, Medical Physics, Plasma Science, Quantum Technologies, Advanced 
Materials Science, Computational Techniques, etc. 

3. Ability to apply the acquired knowledge of Physics to Engineering Problems. 
4. Understanding of basic tools of computational physics and their application in various 

domains of physics and engineering. 
5. Ability to perform the experiments and analyze the experimental data based on acquired 

knowledge in the domains of electronics, atomic and nuclear physics, condensed matter 
physics, optics and Lasers, and other advanced topics.  

6. Skills to demonstrate basic principles of physics by use of simple experimental as well as 
high end experimental techniques. 

7. Ability to develop advanced functional materials and carry out their characterization. 
8. Ability to design, fabricate and characterize device structures such as sensors, solar cells, 

optical components, etc. for various applications. 
9. Ability to make effective oral and written technical communication. 
10. Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics. 

 

 

Learning Outcomes 

1. Knowledge and deep understanding of principles of basic and applied physics. 
2. Subject knowledge to pursue higher studies in the advanced physics areas, such as, High 

Energy Physics, Astrophysics, Quantum Information Processing, Nanotechnology, Plasma 
Technology, Nonlinear Optics, Fibre Optics, etc. 

3. Knowledge of fabrication and characterization of devices, such as, solar cells, gas sensor, 
energy storage, magnetic data storage, etc. 

4. Skills in certain experimental techniques for characterization of materials for their structural, 
morphological, surface topology, electrical, magnetic, dielectric and optical properties. 

5. Knowledge and skills to use various vacuum based techniques for development of thin film 
based materials, structures, and plasma devices and systems. 



6. Technical knowledge and skills to understand and appreciate interdisciplinary research 
topics. 

7. Skills in computational physics for wide range of applications ranging from the visualization 
of physical theories and process, design of functional materials, simulation and modeling of 
optical processes, etc. 

8. Written and Oral technical communication skills. 
 

Program Structure: 

• 60% Core courses ~ 38 credits 
• 30% Program Electives (PE) (can be opted from a list specified by the department which can 

include courses from sister departments which are relevant for the programme) ~ 18 credits 
• 10% Open electives (OE) (OE can be opted from any department as per student‟s choice); 

~ 6 credits 
OE and PE can include lab courses as well as hands-on sessions 

• Project ~ 15 credits  
• Total Credits ~ 77  

 
 
 
 
 
  



Credit Structure for M.Sc. Programs 

Type L-T-P-D Distribution of contact and beyond contact Total Credits 
hours = TH/3 

Contact Beyond Total (TC) 
Hours Contact Hours  

Hours 
(CH) (TH) 

(BCH) 

1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1 

1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1  

1 hour of Lab/  0-0-1-0 1 hr 0.5 hr 1.5 hr 0.5 

Hands On/ Seminar  

1 hour of Project 0-0-0-1 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1 

Program Structure of M.Sc. Programmes 

Semester I Semester II 

Type Nos. CH BCH TH TC Type Nos. CH BCH TH TC 

Lecture 5×(3-0- 15 30 45 15 Lecture 5×(3-0- 15 30 45 15 
0-0) 0-0) 

Lab 2×(0-0- 6 3 9 3 Lab 2×(0-0- 6 3 9 3 
3-0) 3-0) 

Hands 1×(0-0- 3 1.5 4.5 1.5 Hands 1×(0-0- 3 1.5 4.5 1.5 
On 3-0) On 3-0) 

Total   24 34.5 58.5 19.5 Total   24 34.5 58.5 19.5 

Semester III Semester IV 

Type Nos. CH BCH TH TC Type Nos. CH BCH TH TC 

Lecture 4×(3-0- 12 24 36 12 Lecture 3×(3-0- 9 18 27 9 
0-0) 0-0) 

Lab  1×(0-0- 3 1.5 4.5 1.5 Project (0-0-0 - 10 20 30 10 
3-0) 10) 

Semina 1×(0-0- 1 0.5 1.5 0.5       
r 1-0) 

Project (0-0-0 - 5 10 15 5       
5) 

Total   22 35 57 19 Total   19 38 57 19 

In a week: 84 hrs of working time assuming 12 hrs per day available for active work; 
after addressing curricular load demand students will have about 24 hrs of time for 
extra-curricular and co-curricular activities per week. 

 

 



Semester wise courses (Total credits – 77) 

 

I Semester 

Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P Credits 

MC PHL6XX0 Mathematical Physics 3-0-0-0 3 

MC PHL6XX0 Classical Mechanics 3-0-0-0 3 

MC PHL6XX0 Quantum Mechanics 3-0-0-0 3 

MC PHL6XX0 Electronics 3-0-0-0 3 

MC PHL6XX0 Statistical Physics 3-0-0-0 3 

MC PHP6XX0 Electronics Lab 0-0-3-0 1.5 

MC PHP6XX0 Condensed Matter Physics Lab 0-0-3-0 1.5 

MC PHP6XX0Hands-on 0-0-3-0 1.5 

Total 19.5 

 

II Semester 

Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P Credits 

MC PHL6XX0 Electrodynamics 3-0-0-0 3 

MC PHL6XX0 Condensed Matter Physics 3-0-0-0 3 

MC PHL6XX0 Physics of Atoms & Molecules 3-0-0-0 3 

MC PHL6XX0Nuclear & Particle Physics 3-0-0-0 3 

ME Program Elective-1 3-0-0-0 3 

MC PHP6XX0Atomic & Nuclear Physics Lab 0-0-3-0 1.5 

MC PHP6XX0Optics & Lasers Lab 0-0-3-0 1.5 

MC PHP6XX0Hands-on 0-0-3-0 1.5 

Total 19.5 

 

 

 

 

 



III Semester 

Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P Credits 

ME Program Elective-2 3-0-0-0 3 

ME Program Elective-3 3-0-0-0 3 

ME Program Elective-4 3-0-0-0 3 

ME Open Elective-1 3-0-0-0 3 

MC Computational Physics Lab 0-0-3-0 1.5 

MC Seminar 0-0-1-0 0.5 

MP Project 0-0-0-5 5 

Total 19.0 

 

IV Semester 

Cat. Course Number, Course Title L-T-P Credits 

ME Program Elective-5 3-0-0-0 3 

ME Program Elective-6 3-0-0-0 3 

ME Open Elective-2 3-0-0-0 3 

MP Project 0-0-0-10 10 

Total 19.0 

 

 

  



Topic Cloud 

 

 

  



Topic Cloud Details 

 

Fundamental Physics 

1. Mathematical Physics 
2. Classical Mechanics 
3. Quantum Mechanics 
4. Statistical Physics 
5. Electronics 
6. Electrodynamics & STR 
7. Condensed Matter Physics 
8. Physics of Atoms & Molecules 
9. Nuclear & Particle Physics 

 

Multidisciplinary Science and Technology 

1. Computational Physics (Fractals with ME & Maths) 
2. High Energy Physics and Space Science 

● Introduction to Space Science 
● GTR 
● Particle Physics 
● Neutrino Telescope 
● X-ray Astronomy  
● Cosmology 

3. Nanoscience & Nanotechnology (Fractals with MT & CY)  
4. Advanced Condensed Matter Physics 
5. Introduction to Materials Characterization (Fractals with MT) 
6. Introduction to Medical Physics (Optical, radiation based, image analysis, MRI) (Fractals 

with BSBE, Electrical)  
7. Fundamentals of Plasma & Fusion Science 
8. Introduction to Quantum Technologies 
9. Laser Technologies 
10. Computational Materials Science (Fractals with MT and CY) 
11. Soft Matter Physics (Fractals with CY) 
12. Statistical methods for data analysis (Maths and Computers) 
13. Non-Perturbative Aspects of Quantum Field Theory 
14. Critical Phenomena and Renormalization Group 

 

Engineering Physics 

1. Optical Fibre Technology (Fractals with EE) 
2. Engineering Optics 
3. Energy Harvesting Technologies (Fractals with ME) 
4. Solar Energy Technologies (Fractals with ME) 
5. Quantum Optics & Engineering 
6. Cold Plasma Technologies 
7. Nuclear Engineering (Fractals with ME & EE) 

 

Teaching Laboratories 

1. Atomic & Nuclear Physics  
2. Condensed Matter Physics  
3. Electronics Laboratory 
4. Optics and Lasers 
5. Computational Physics 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Core Courses 
  



Title Mathematical Physics Number PHL6XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Compulsory 

Prerequisite    

Objectives 

1. To gain the mathematical skills necessary to approach problems in fundamental and 
advanced physics courses. 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Apply the mathematical skills in designing problems and solving them. 
2. Will enable students to apply different transforms to solve mathematical problems of 

interest in science and engineering. 
Contents  

Complex variables:Analyticity and Cauchy-Reimann Conditions, Cauchy‟s integral theorem 
and formula, Taylor‟s series and Laurent‟s series expansion, Branch Points and Cuts, 
Reimann Sheets and surfaces, Residues, Cauchy‟s Residue theorem, Jordan‟s Lemma to 
evaluate infinite integrals, Evaluation of definite integrals.(12 lectures) 

Differential Equations and Special Functions:Ordinary differential equations, second order 
homogeneous and inhomogeneous equations, Wronskian, General solutions, Series solution. 
Gauss hypergeometric and confluent hypergeometric equations, Sturm Liouville problem, 
Legendre, Hermite and the associated polynomials, Bessel functions, Integral representation 
of special functions, Applications to electrostatics and quantum mechanics.(16 lectures) 

Fourier and Laplace Transforms:Fourier transform, Sine, Cosine and Complex transforms with 
examples, Definition, Properties and Representations of Dirac Delta Function, Properties of 
Fourier Transforms, Transforms of derivatives, Parseval‟s Theorem, Convolution Theorem, 
Momentum representation, Applications to Partial differential equations, Discrete Fourier 
transform, Fast Fourier transform, Laplace transform, Convolution theorem and its 
applications, Laplace transform method of solving differential equations, Applications to 
electrostatics.(14 lectures) 

Textbook 

1. Arfken George, B. and Weber Hans, J., Mathematical Methods for Physicists, Academic 
Press, 2012.  

2. Boas Mary, L., Mathematical Methods in the Physical Sciences, John Wiley & Sons, 2005.  
Self-Learning Material 

1. Selected topics in Mathematical Physics, NPTEL course, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115106086/ (by Professor V. Balakrishnan, Department of 
Physics, IIT Madras). 

2. Duan L., www-personal.umich.edu 
Preparatory Course Material 

1. Mathematical physics online NPTEL course by Dr. Saurabh Basu, IIT Guwahati. 
 

 



Title Classical Mechanics Number PHL6XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Compulsory  

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide concepts and problem solving approach related to Lagrangian and Hamiltonian 
formulation in Mechanics. 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. To apply the Variational principles to physical problems. 
2. Model mechanical systems using Lagrange and Hamilton equation of motion. 
Contents  

Survey of elementary principles: review of the Newtonian mechanics, constraints, 
D'Alembert's principle, Lagrange‟s equation, Its application to simple problems. (7 Lectures) 

Central force problem: The equation of motion, the equivalent one-dimensional problem, 
classification of orbits, Virial theorem, Differential equation for the orbit, inverse square law 
of force, scattering in central force field. (7 Lectures) 

Variational Principles and Lagrange’s equations: calculus of variations, Hamilton's principle, 
derivation of Lagrange's equation from Hamilton's principle, its application, conservation and 
symmetry property. (6 Lectures) 

Small oscillations: formulation of the problem, eigenvalue equation, principal axis 
transformation, normal coordinates, triatomic molecule free vibration, forced and damped 
vibrations. (6 Lectures) 

Rigid body motion: orthogonal transformation, the Eulerian angles, Euler‟s theorem, 
infinitesimal rotation, tensors and dyadics, force free motion of rigid body, the heavy 
symmetrical top.  (5 Lectures) 

Hamilton's equation of motion: Legendre transformations and Hamilton's equation, cyclic 
coordinates, Routh's procedure, physical significance of Hamiltonian.  (5 Lectures) 

Canonical Transformation: Examples of canonical transformations, Lagrange and Poisson 
Brackets, symmetry group of mechanical systems. (6 Lectures) 

Textbook 

1. Goldstein, H., Classical Mechanics, Pearson India Limited, New Delhi (2011). 
Reference Books  

1. Jose, J. V. and Saletan, E. J., Classical Dynamics: A Contemporary Approach, Cambridge 
University Press, (2002).  

2. Landau, L.D. and Lifshitz, E.M., Mechanics, Pergamon Press, (1960). 
Online Course Material  

1. Banerjee D., Classical Mechanics,  Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
Kharagpur,https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115105098/. 



Title Quantum Mechanics Number PHL6XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Compulsory  

Prerequisite    

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce the key concepts of non-relativistic quantum mechanics. 
Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understand the basic concepts and working knowledge of non-relativistic quantum 
mechanics.  

Contents 

Origin of quantum theory: Blackbody radiation, Photoelectric effect, Compton scattering, 
Matter waves, Uncertainty principle, Stern-Gerlach experiment. (5 Lectures) 

Formalism: Linear vector spaces and operators in Hilbert space, Measurements, observables 
and the uncertainty relations, Change of basis, Momentum representations, Equations of 
motion in Schroedinger and Heisenberg pictures, One dimensional potential problems, Linear 
harmonic oscillator, Creation and annihilation operators. (10 Lectures) 

Theory of Angular Momentum: Angular momentum operators, Eigenvalues and Eigenfunctions 
of, Spherical harmonics Relation between rotation and angular momentum, Rotational 
symmetry and conservation of angular momentum, Reflection invariance and parity, 
Commutation rules, Matrix representations, addition of angular momenta and Clebsch-
Gordon coefficients, Pauli spin matrices. (12 Lectures)   

Approximation methods: Time independent perturbation theory, Perturbation theory for 
degenerate states, Dalgarno‟s method, Zeeman and Stark effects, WKB approximation and 
its applications, Variational method and its applications to helium atom and many particle 
systems, Time dependent Perturbation theory, Fermi‟s Golden rule, Semi classical theory of 
interaction of atoms with radiation. (13 Lectures) 

Textbook 

1. Shankar, R., Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Plenum Press, 1994. 
Reference Books 

1. Das, A., Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, Hindustan Book Agency, 2003. 
2. Sakurai, J. J., Modern Quantum Mechanics, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1994. 
Self-Learning Material 

1. NPTEL Course Material, Balakrishnan, V., Department of Physics, IIT Madras 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/ 122106034/. 

2. Vuletic, V., Quantum Physics I, http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/90372. 
Preparatory Course Material 

1. Susskind, L., https://www.courses.com/stanford-university/foundations-of-modern-
physics. 

 

Title Electronics Number PHL6XX0 



Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Compulsory 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Make the students understand the basics of electronics. 
2. Make the students understand the use of electronic devices. 
3. Make the students understand to build circuit from individual components. 
 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Design new circuits using the electronic components. 
2. Assemble analog and digital components to make new circuit. 
 

Contents  

Transistors: JFET, transconductance, JFET amplifiers, JFET switch, biasing in Ohmic region and 
active region, DMOSFET, depletion mode MOSFET, enhancement mode MOSFET, Digital 
switch, CMOS, E-MOSFET amplifiers, frequency response of amplifier, impedance matching, 
Bode plots, frequency analysis of FET. (8 lectures) 

Differential amplifiers and Operational Amplifiers: differential amplifier, DC-analysis, AC-
analysis, input characteristics of an Op Amp, common mode gain, loaded differential 
amplifier, the 741 Op Amp, Inverting Amplifier, Non-inverting Amplifier, two Op-Amp 
applications, negative feedback, VCVS voltage gain, ICVS amplifier, VCIS amplifier, ICIS 
amplifier, bandwidth. (8 lectures) 

Linear Op-Amp Circuit Applications: inverting amplifier circuits, non-inverting amplifier 
circuits, inverter/non-inverter circuits, differential amplifiers, summing amplifier circuits, 
voltage-controlled current source, automatic gain control, active filters, ideal responses, 
approximate responses, passive filters, first order stages, VCVS unity gain second order low 
pass filters, higher order filters, VCVS equal component low pass filters, Bandpass filters, 
Band stop Filters, All-pass filters. (6 lectures) 

Nonlinear Op Amp circuit: comparator with zero reference, comparator with non-zero 
references, comparator with hysteresis, integrator, waveform conversion, waveform 
generation, differentiator. (3 lectures) 

Oscillators: sinusoidal oscillation, Wein Bridge Oscillator, RC Oscillator, Colpitts Oscillators, LC 
oscillators, Quartz crystals, the 555 timer, astable operation of the 555 timer, 555 circuit 
applications, the phase locked loop. (3 lectures) 

Digital Principle and Digital Logic: logic gates, combinational logic circuits, SOP, POS 
representation, Karnaugh Map. (3 lectures) 

Data Processing Circuit: Multiplexers, demultiplexers, decoder, encoder, parity generator and 
checker, arithmetic circuits, adder, subtractors, clocks and timing circuits, 555 timer-
astable, monostable, flip-flops, RS, JK, D, edge triggering, registers, SISO, SIPO, PISO, 
PIPO, application of shift registers, counters, asynchronous counters, synchronous counter, 
modulus of a counter, counter design, design of synchronous and asynchronous sequential 



circuits. (11 lectures) 

Textbook  

1. Malvino, A., Bates, D., Electronic Principles, McGrawHill, 2016. 
2. Leach, D. P., Malvino, A. P. and Saha, G., Digital Principles and Applications, TMH, 2014. 
3. Horowitz, P. and Hill, W., The Art of Electronics, CUP, 2016. 
 

Self-Learning Materials 

1. Aggarwal, A., Circuits and Electronics, 2007, MIT Open Course Ware : 
http://ocw.mit.edu/6-002S07. 

 

Preparatory Course Materials 

1. Dube, D.C., Electronics, Department of Physics,  IIT Delhi: http://nptel.iitm.ac.in. 
 

  



Title Statistical Physics Number PHL6XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Compulsory  

Prerequisite    

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce various aspects of quantum statistics and its relevant applications in physics.  

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Apply the fundamental principles of statistical physics. 

Contents 

Thermodynamics: Basics, first and second laws; Maxwell‟s equation; extensive functions, 
Kinetic theory of gases. (5 Lecture) 

Conditions for phase equilibrium and stability: Multiphase equilibrium; stability. (6 Lecture) 

Statistical mechanics: Ensembles; non-interacting ideal systems. Partition function for various 
systems. (11 Lectures)  

Quantum statistics: Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac distributions; black body radiation; Debye 
model specific heat, Bose-Einstein condensate. (8 Lectures) 

Statistical Mechanics for interacting systems: Introduction, Ising Model, Neumann‟s Liquid 
crystals. (5 Lecture) 

Critical phenomena: Mean field theory; Landau's theory; Curie-Weiss theory; Renormalization 
group. (7 Lectures)  

Textbook 

1. Landau, L. D. and Lifshitz, E. M., Statistical Physics, Part 1, Pergamon Press, 1980. 

 Reference Books 

1. Chandler, D., Introduction to Modern Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, 1987. 

2. Huang, K., Statistical Mechanics, John Wiley and Sons, 1987. 

Self-Learning Material  

1. NPTEL course material, Balakrishnan, V., Department of Physics, IIT Madras 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/122106027. 

 

 

 

 



 

Title Electrodynamics Number PHL6XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Compulsory  

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide the concepts regarding fields and forces in Electrodynamics and Magneto dynamics 
using basic scientific method. 

2. Basic understanding of relativistic electrodynamics and its applications in branches of 
Physical Sciences. 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Explain and solve problems based on classical electrodynamics using Maxwell‟s equation. 
2. To understand and proficiently carry out research by applying Classical relativistic 

electromagnetism using fundamental concepts of physical sciences. 
Contents  

Electrostatics, Magnetostatics and Electrodynamics: Gauss's law, Boundary value problems, 
multipoles, dielectrics, Biot and Savart law, Ampere‟s law, Faraday's law, Displacement 
current, Maxwell‟s equations, Wave propagation in Conductors and Dielectrics. (6 Lectures) 

Plane Electromagnetic Waves and Wave Propagation: Plane Waves in Non-conducting Medium 
Linear and Circular Polarization, Stokes Parameter, Reflection and Refraction of 
Electromagnetic Waves at a Plane Interface between Dielectrics, Fresnel Equation, Group 
Velocity Dispersion (GVD), Kramers-Kronig Relations.  (10 Lectures) 

Waveguides and Resonant Cavities: Fieldsat the surface of and within a Conductor; Cylindrical 
Cavities and Wave Guides, Resonant Cavities, Power losses in a Cavity and Q of a Cavity. (7 
Lectures) 

Simple Radiating Systems and Diffraction:  Fields of Radiation of localized oscillating Source, 
Electric Dipole fields and radiation and its application to radio waves. (6 Lectures)  

Radiation by moving Charges: Lienard-Wiechertz Potentials and Fields for a Point Charge, 
Total power Radiated by an Accelerating charge, Larmor‟s formula. (5 Lectures) 

Special Theory of Relativity: Minkowski Space and Four vectors, Concepts of Four-velocity, 
Four Acceleration and higher rank tensors, relativistic formation of electrodynamics, Action 
principle and Electromagnetic energy momentum Tensor. (8 Lectures) 

Textbook 

1. Jackson, J. D., Classical Electrodynamics, Wiley India Pvt. Ltd., 2007. 
Reference Books  

1. Lorrain, P.  and Corson, D., Electromagnetic Fields and Waves, CBS Publishers, 2003. 
2. Panofsky W.K.H. and Philips M., Classical Electricity and Magnetism, Dover Publishers, 

1990. 
Self-Learning course material 

1. Dighe, A., Electrodynamics, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, 



https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115101004/. 
2. Gut, A., Lecture notes on Electromagnetism II, MIT open course ware 

https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/physics/8-07-electromagnetism-ii-fall-2012/lecture-notes/. 
 

  



Title Condensed Matter Physics Number PHL6XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Compulsory 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide the student with an extended knowledge of the principles and techniques of solid 
state physics. 

2. Provide an understanding of structure, thermal, electrical and magnetic properties of 
matter. 
 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Formulate basic models for electrons and lattice vibrations for describing the physics of 
crystalline materials. 

2. Develop an understanding of the relation between band structure and the electrical/optical 
properties of a material. 

 

Contents  

Crystallography: Structural description of liquids and solids, External symmetry elements, 
Point groups, Direct periodic lattice, Basic concept of aperiodicity, Reciprocal lattice and 
diffraction conditions and its relation with Brillouin zones, Intensity of Bragg scattering from 
a unit cell and extinction conditions. (10 Lectures) 

Lattice Vibrations: Elastic waves, Enumeration of modes, Density of states of a continuous 
medium, Specific heat models of Einstein and Debye, Concept of phonon, Lattice waves, 
Lattice dynamics of crystals with up to two atoms per primitive basis, Density of states of a 
lattice, Thermal Conductivity, Scattering of X-rays, neutrons and light by phonons. (11 
Lectures) 

Electronic Properties of Solids: Electrons in periodic potential, Band Theory, Tight Binding, 
Cellular and Pseudo potential methods, Symmetry of energy bands, density of states, Fermi 
surface. (10 Lectures) 

Magnetism & Superconductivity: Introduction to types of magnetism, Curie-Weiss Law, 
Magnetic Domains & Hysteresis, Zero resistance, Meissner effect, Thermodynamics of the 
superconducting transition, Electrodynamics of superconductivity, BCS theory of 
superconductivity, Josephson effect. (11 Lectures) 

Textbook  

1. Kittel, C., Introduction to Solid State Physics, Wiley, 8th Edition, 2008. 
2. Ashcroft, N., W. and Mermin, N., D., Solid State Physics, Cengage Learning, 1976. 
3. Omar, M. A., Elementary Solid State Physics, Pearson, 2009. 
 

Self-Learning Material  

1. Rangarajan, G., Condensed Matter Physics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Physics, 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115106061/. 



2. Wen, X-G., Physics of Solids I, MIT open course, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/physics/8-
231-physics-of-solids-i-fall-2006/     

Preparatory Course Material  

1. Simon, H., S. (2013), The Oxford Solid State Basics, Oxford University Press. 
 

 

 

  



Title Physics of Atoms and Molecules Number PHL6XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Compulsory  

Prerequisite    

Objectives 

1. To learn Atomic Physics with problem solving approach towards spectroscopy. 

Learning Outcomes 

1. The students will have an understanding of quantum behavior of atoms in external electric 
and magnetic fields. 

Course Content 

Hydrogen atom: Review of the Bohr atom model, solution of the Schrodinger equation, 
spectra of hydrogen and hydrogen-like atoms. Review of time-independent perturbation 
theory. Fine structure of the hydrogen atom: spin-orbit coupling and relativistic correction to 
the kinetic energy. Review of the Dirac equation. Dirac equation in the non-relativistic limit. 
Zeeman and Stark Spectroscopy Hyperfine interaction in atomic Hydrogen. Spectroscopy 
with the 21 cm emission line.  Review of time-dependent perturbation theory. (11 Lectures) 

Interaction of electromagnetic radiation with a two-level atom. Rabi flopping: The dipole 
approximation, electric dipole, magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole transitions. Selection 
rules. Transition probabilities and intensity of spectral lines. Line broadening mechanisms. 
Spontaneous and stimulated emissions and Einstein coefficients, masers and lasers. Lamb 
shift. Quantization of the electromagnetic field. The Raman effect. Introduction to NMR and 
ESR. Review of Pauli's exclusion principle. The spin-statistics theorem. (11 Lectures) 

The Helium spectrum. Many electron   systems: Electron configurations and spectroscopic 
notation, equivalent and non-equivalent electrons and Hund's rules. Hartree-Fock SCF 
method, proof of Koopmans theorem, Slater's approximation to exchange. Total Hamiltonian 
of a molecule. Born -Oppenheimer approximation. Rotational and Vibrational Spectra of 
molecules. Anharmonicity, Franck-Condon principle, Electronic. Infrared and Raman Spectra 
analysis. (14 Lecture) 

Molecular Physics: Molecular Orbital and Electronic configuration of Diatomic molecules: H2, 
C2, O2, NO and CN; Vibrational structure and vibrational analysis, Dissociation Energy, 
Rotational Raman spectra and influence of nuclear spin (6 Lectures)  

Textbook  

1. Bransden, B.H. and Joachain, C.J., (2004), Physics of Atoms and Molecules, Prentice Hall, 
2nd Edition, Pearson Education, Delhi 

References 

1. Condon, E. U. and Shortley, G. H., (1951), The Theory of Atomic spectra, Cambridge 
University Press  

Online Course Material 

1. NPTEL course material  Prof. T. Kundu, IIT Mumbai  
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115101003/ 



Title Nuclear  and  Particle Physics Number PHL6XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Compulsory  

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide background to understand the role of nuclear physics in fundamental as well as 
applied aspects. 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Grasp the theoretical concepts of nuclear reactions and various nuclear models. 
2. Understand details of various applications of nuclear physics. 
 

Contents  

General properties of nuclei & Radioactive decay: Mass, radius, angular momentum, Magnetic 
dipole and electric quadrupole moment, Parity, Isospin, Radioactive disintegration and 
displacement law, α-particles, Geiger-Nuttall law, Quantum theory of α-decay, Continuous β-
spectrum, Neutrino hypothesis, Fermi theory of β-decay, Selection rules for β-decay, Parity 
violation in β-decays, Electric & magnetic multipole radiation. (8 Lectures) 

Nuclear Detectors and Accelerators: Interaction of charged particles and radiation with matter, 
Gaseous and Solid state detectors, Cyclic and Linear accelerators, Fixed target accelerators, 
Colliding beam machines. (5 Lectures) 

Nuclear forces: Deuteron problem, Low energy neutron-proton scattering, Spin dependence of 
neutron-proton interaction, Non-central force, Low energy proton-proton scattering, High-
energy neutron-proton & proton-proton scattering, Meson theory of nuclear force, Nature of 
two nucleon potential. (7 Lectures) 

Nuclear Models: Liquid drop model, Bether-Weizsacker formula, Nucleon mean potential, 
approximation by solvable potentials, Shell model, Collective model. (6 Lectures) 

Nuclear Reactions: Compound nucleus, Breit-Wigner formula, Evaporation model, Optical 
model, Heavy ion reaction, Phase transition and quark-gluon plasma; Nuclear fission, Bohr-
Wheeler theory, Fission reactors, Nuclear fusion and thermo-nuclear reaction, Fusion 
reactors, Source of energy in stars, Solar neutrino problem, Nucleo-synthesis. (8 Lectures) 

Elementary Particles: Kinematics of high energy collisions, Pi mesons, Muons and their 
properties, Strange mesons, Hyperons, Resonance particles, Fundamental interactions in 
nature, Quark hypothesis of elementary particles, Classification of elementary particles, 
Conservation laws. (8 Lectures) 

Textbook 

1. Ghosal, S. N., Nuclear Physics, S. Chand, 2011. 
2. Burcham, W. E. and Jobes, M., Nuclear and Particle Physics, John Wiley & Sons Inc, 1995. 
 



Reference Books  

1. Cohen, B., Concepts of Nuclear Physics, McGraw Hill Education, 2017. 
2. Wong, S. M., Introductory Nuclear Physics, Prentice Hall India Learning Pvt. Ltd., 1996. 
 

Online Course Material  

1. Verma, H. C., Nuclear Physics: Fundamentals and Applications, IIT Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115104043/ 
 

 

 

  



Title Engineering Optics Number PHL6XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives 

1. This course provides comprehensive knowledge of optical science with elementary 
engineering applications. 

 

Learning Outcomes  

1. The students will become familiar with the concepts of optical sciences. 
2. Students will become familiar with working principles and applications of key optical 

components and devices.   
Contents  

Characteristics and Description of Light:Photons, Uncertainty principle for Photons, properties 
of light beam (1 lecture) 

Geometrical Optics: Ray characteristics, Ray matrices for optical components, Ray propagation 
through optical elements and Imaging (2 lectures)  

Wave Optics and applications: plane waves of monochromatic light, temporal and spatial 
coherence, Interference, interferometer and applications, Fresnel diffraction, Babinet‟s 
principle, Fraunhofer diffraction, limit of resolution, N-slit diffraction, spatial frequency 
filtering and applications (9 lectures) 

Polarization of Light and holography: Stokes parameters, Jones and Muller matrices, 
Applications, anisotropic media, liquid crystals, in-line and off-axis holography, holograms (9 
lectures) 

Integrated Optics: Different type of waveguides, pulse dispersion in waveguides, planar 
waveguides, strip waveguides, guided wave devices (6 lectures) 

Lasers and Nonlinear Optical Devices: The laser principle, Three- and four level lasers, Q-
switching and mode locking, He-Ne laser, CO2 laser, Laser Applications, Physical origin of 
nonlinearity, Electro-Optic effect, Second Harmonic generation, Optical Rectification, Sum 
and Difference frequency generation, nonlinear pulse propagation and solitons (9 lectures)  

Optical instruments: The Eye, basic Camera, Projection Systems, Microscope, Telescope and 
resolving power of optical instruments (6 lectures) 

Textbook  

1. Ghatak, A. K., and Thyagarajan, K., Optical Electronics, Cambridge University Press 2017 
2. Saleh, B. E. A. and Teich, M. C., Fundamentals of Photonics, Wiley, 2018 
3. Yariv, A., Quantum electronics, wiley, 1989 
 

Self-Learning Material  

1. Barbastathis, G. and Sheppard C., Optics, 

https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mechanical-engineering/2-71-optics-spring-2009/ 



Reference Course Material  

1. Ghatak, A., Optics, 2nd edition, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2000 
 

 

  



Title Computational Physics Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives 

1. To incorporate modern computational skills into the scientific problem solving paradigm. 

 

Learning Outcomes  

1. The successful students will become familiar with commonly used numerical techniques to 
solve problems in physics. 

 

Contents  

(Fractal 1) PHL7XX1 Numerical Methods-I [1-0-0] Solution of algebraic and transcendental 
equations: Iterative, bisection and Newton Raphson methods, Solution of simultaneous 
linear equations: Matrix inversion method (14 lectures) 

(Fractal 2) PHL7XX2 Numerical Methods-II [1-0-0] Interpolation: Newton and Lagrange 
formulas, Numerical differentiation, Numerical Integration, Trapezoidal, Simpson and 
Gaussian quadrature methods, Least-square curve fitting, straight line and polynomial fits. 
(8 lectures) 

Numerical solution of ordinary differential equations: Euler and Runge-Kutta methods. (6 
lectures) 

(Fractal 3) PHL7XX3 Simulations: Numerical Methods [1-0-0]Generation of uniformly 
distributed random integers, Statistical tests of randomness, Monte-Carlo evaluation of 
integrals and error analysis, Non-uniform probability distributions, Importance sampling, 
Rejection method, Metropolis algorithm, Molecular diffusion and Brownian motion as random 
walk problems and their Monte Carlo simulation. (8 lectures) 

Quantum Simulations: Time-independent Schrodinger equation in one dimension (radial or 
linear equations), Scattering from a spherical potential, Born Approximation, Bound State 
solutions. (6 lectures) 

 

The students will be assigned computer laboratory work based on the above syllabus. 

 

Textbook  

1. Koonin, S. E. and Meredith, D. C., Computational Physics, Addison-Wesley, 1990. 

2. Tao Pang, An Introduction to Computational Physics, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1997. 

 

Self-Learning Material  



1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115104095/ 

2. https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115106060/ 

 

Reference Course Material  

1. Landau, R. H. and Mejia, M. J. P., Computational Physics, John Wiley, 1997.  

2. Thijssen, J. M., Computational Physics, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1999. 

 

 

 

  



Title  High Energy Physics Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide background to understand the concepts of particle physics.  

2. Acquaint with techniques used in recent neutrino telescopes. 

 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understand concepts of Feynman calculus, details of QED and weak interactions. 

2. Learn results and future prospects associated with recent neutrino observatories. 

 

Contents 

Quantum field theory (QFT): Classical field theory: Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formalisms; 
Noether‟s theorem. This introduces the concept of symmetries in a consistent fashion. Need 
for quantum field theory: particles and fields, Charge conjugation and C Parity, Interaction 
of a spin-0 particle with an electromagnetic field.  (5 Lectures) 

Klein Gordon Equation: KG equation, The non-relativistic limit, Free spin-0 particles, The 
charged KG field, Lagrange density and energy-momentum tensor of the KG-field, Lorentz 
Invariance of the KG equation.  (6 Lectures) 

Gauge invariance of the couplings, Lagrange density and energy-momentum tensor for a KG 
particle in an electromagnetic field, Negative Energy Solutions, Antiparticles, Gamma-
matrices and their properties, Covariance of Dirac equation, Charge conjugation, Parity & 
Time reversal invariance, Plane wave solution, Two component theory of neutrino, Spin and 
Helicity. (6 Lectures) 

Quantum Electrodynamics (QED): Feynman rules for QED, Electron-Muon scattering, Electron-
Electron scattering, Compton scattering, Casimir‟s trick, Mott and Rutherford scattering, Pair 
annihilation. (9 Lectures) 

Weak Interactions: Parity violation and the V-A form of the weak interaction, interpretation of 
the coupling G, Nuclear β-decay, Muon and pion decay, Charged current neutrino-electron 
scattering, neutrino quark scattering, Observation of weak neutral current, Neutral current 
neutrino-quark scattering, Cabibbo angle. (10 Lectures) 

Neutrino Telescope: Interaction of Ultra-High Energy (UHE) neutrinos with cosmic microwave 
background, Askaryan effect, Relic neutrinos, Cherenkov based neutrino detectors, Antarctic 
Impulsive Transient Antenna (ANITA) experiment, Antarctic Muon and Neutrino Detector 
Array (AMANDA) and Ice Cube experiments, ANTARES telescope, Next generation neutrino 
telescopes. (6 Lectures) 



 

Text Books 

1. Griffiths, D., Introduction to Elementary Particles, Wiley-Vch 2010. 

2. Giunti, C. and Kim, C.W., Fundamentals of neutrino physics and Astrophysics, Oxford 
University Press; 1st edition 2007.   

 

Self-Learning Material 

1. Guth A., Lecture Notes MIT Course No. 8.323, Relativistic Quantum Field Theory I, Spring 
Sem., 2008. 

 

Preparatory Course Material  

1. Sakurai,J.J., Advanced Quantum Mechanics, Addison-Wesley 1967. 

 

 

  



Title  Introduction to Space Science Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [2] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide introduction to space science. 
2. Provide introduction of cosmology 
 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Grasp different physical aspects of space science. 
 

Contents ((i) Introduction to Astronomy, (ii) General theory of relativity andCosmology) 

 

PHL7XX1 (Introduction to Astronomy) [1-0-0] 

Basic observation of space: Celestial coordinates, brightness, absolute and relative magnitude, 
sources of astronomical information, astronomy in different bands of electromagnetic radiation. 
(4 Lectures) 

X-ray Astronomy: X-ray emissions- Thermal, non-thermal: Bremsstrahlung, Synchrotron, X-
ray satellite detectors. Properties of stars: Colour and surface temperature, stellar spectra, the 
Hertzsprung-Russel diagram, size, mass and temperature of stars.  Celestial objects: The Sun, 
Neutron stars, classification of Galaxies, Exotic matter in space: dark matter. (10 Lectures) 

 

PHL7XX2 (General Theory of Relativity and Cosmology) [2-0-0] 

General theory of relativity: Principle of equivalence–gravitational forces–geodesic–Tensor 
algebra–tensor density–Killing vectors and symmetries Einstein's field equation. (8 lectures) 

 

Schwarzschild solution–Birkhoff's theorem - geodesic equation in Schwarzschild space time–
Precession of perihelion of mercury - gravitational frequency shift - Shapiro delay. (4 lectures) 

 

Cosmology: Olber's paradox: Why is the sky dark at night?, Expanding universe and Hubble's 
law, Finiteness and infiniteness of the universe. Evolutionary view of the Universe:  The paradox 
of thermal death, Thermodynamics of the expanding universe (Radiation under adiabatic 
expansion, Particles under adiabatic expansion), the negative thermal capacity of the solar 
system, structure formation. (10 Lectures) 

Thermal history of the universe:  Cosmic microwave background. Cosmological Models: 
Friedmann-Robertson Walker equation, Open, flat and closed universe, dark energy. (6 



Lectures) 

 

Text Books 

1. Narlikar, J. V., An introduction to cosmology, Cambridge University Press 2002. 
2. Carroll, S. M., Spacetime and Geometry, Pearson India Education Services 2018. 
3. M.Longair, High Energy Astrophysics vol 1, Cambridge University Press. 
 

Self-Learning Material 

1. Bertschinger E. & Taylor E. F., Lecture Notes MIT Course No. 8.224, General Relativity and 
Astrophysics, Spring Sem., 2003. 

2. Rappaport, S. A., and  Elliot, J., Introduction to Astronomy, 
https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/34941 

 

Preparatory Course Material  

1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115105046/. 
 

 

  



Title Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce physics of low dimensional objects and discuss changes in mechanical, electronic, 
magnetic and optical properties at reduced dimensions. 

 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Obtain a flavor of nanoscience and nanotechnology and develop insight into the physical 
concepts behind nano-scale phenomena. 

2. Understand few nano-structures for practical device applications will also be discussed. 
 

Contents  

PHL7XX1 (Basics of Nanomaterials, Nanoparticles and Clusters) [1-0-0] 

(a) Quantum Confinement and definition of Nano: Electron states, energy bands and density of      

states for quantum Systems; Heterojunctions, Type I and Type II Heterostructures, Quantum  

wells, Quantum wires and Quantum dots, Effective Mass. (5 lectures)  

(b) Nanoparticles and Clusters: Metal nanoclusters, Magic numbers, Geometric structures,  

Electronic structures, Magnetic and semiconducting clusters and nanoparticles, Rare gas and  

molecular clusters, Carbon nanostructures, 2-D materials. (9 lectures) 

 

PHL7XX2 (Nanotechnology for Energy) [1-0-0] 

(a) Energy generation/storage: Dye sensitized solar cells, Quantum Dot sensitized solar cell,  

electrode materials for rechargeable batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, Hydrogen storage in  

carbon nanomaterials, nanocatalyst. (10 lectures) 

(b) Nanotechnology in data storage: Magnetic hard disk drive, Magnetic read and write head,  

Flash memory, Solid state drive, Future of data storage. (4 lectures) 

 

PHL7XX3 (Nanotechnology for Water and Healthcare) [1-0-0] 

(a) Nanotechnology in Water/Air purification: Nanomaterials for water and air purification,  

Water desalination using carbon nanomaterials. (8 lectures) 



(b) Nanotechnology in healthcare: Diagnostics using nanomaterials, i.e., biosensors, drug 
delivery using magnetic nanoparticles, magnetic hyperthermia for cancer treatment. (6 
lectures) 

 

Textbook  

1. Poole C.P. Jr. and Owens F.J., Introduction to nanotechnology, Wiley-Interscience, 2003 
2. Shong C.W., Haur S.C. and Wee A. T. S., Science at the nanoscale, CRC Press, 2009 
3. Davis J.H., The physics of low-dimensional semiconductors, Cambridge Uni Press, 2012 
 

Self-Learning Material  

1. Quereshi, M., Department of Chemistry, IIT Guwahati, 
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/104103019/. 

2. Online review papers in various journals. 
 

Preparatory Course Material  

1. Balani, K. and Subramaniam, A., Department of Material Science and Engineering, IIT 
Kanpur, NPTEL Course: https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/118104008/. 

 

 

 

  



Title Advanced Condensed Matter Physics Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective  

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide training and knowledge to condensed matter physics of complex systems including 
both fundamental as well as applied aspects. 

 

Learning Outcomes  

1. The students are expected to have the ability to understand magnetism, ferroelectricity, 
opto-electronic properties and basics of soft condensed matter physics. 

 

Contents  

Magnetism and Ferroelectricity: Dia/para magnetism, ferro, ferri/anti-ferro magnetism, 
superpara/superferro magnetism, magnetic domains, domain dynamics, introduction to 
magnetic resonance.Dielectric constant and polarizability, phase transition, ferroelectric 
crystals classification, displacive transitions, Landau theory of phase transition, first and 
second order transition, antiferroelectricity, ferroelectric domains and imaging. (11 lectures) 

Optical properties and plasmons: Electron gas, dielectric function of electron, dispersion 
relation, plasmon, electrostatic screening, polaritons, Electron-electron and electron-phonon 
interaction, Kramer-Kroning relation, excitons, Raman effect. (10 lectures)  

Defects and Interfaces: Surface crystallography, Surface electronic structure, 
magnetoresistance, Heterostructures, point defects, dislocations, Burger vectors, dislocation 
and crystal growth. (10 lectures) 

Soft Matter: Time and length scales, Colloids, polymers, liquid crystals and ionic soft matter, 
phase transition in soft matter systems. (11 lectures) 

 

Textbook 

1. Kittel C, Solid State Physics, Wiley, 2004. 
2. Ashcroft N. W., Mermin N. D., Solid State Physics, Saunders, 1976. 
3. R. A. L. Jones, Soft condensed matter, Oxford University Press 2002. 
 

Reference Books  

1. Sander M. Leonard, Advanced Condensed Matter Physics, Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009. 
2. Snoke W. David, Solid State Physics: Essential Concepts, Pearson, 2009. 
3. M. Doi, Soft matter physics, Oxford University Press, 2014. 
 

Online Course Material  

1. Rangarajan, G., Condensed Matter Physics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Physics, 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115106061/. 



2. Wen, X. G., Physics of Solids I, MIT open course, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/physics/8-
231-physics-of-solids-i-fall-2006/  

 

 

  



Title Introduction to Material Characterization Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide an introduction to various characterization techniques for materials and devices  
 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Obtain basic idea of various techniques used to determine structural, compositional, and 
functional properties such as electrical, magnetic and optical properties of materials  

2. Appreciate the distinction between diffraction, imaging and spectroscopic based techniques 
for material characterization 

 

Contents  

PHL7XX1 (Material Characterization by Diffraction and Electron Microscopy) [1-0-0] 

(a) Introduction and Necessity of Material Characterization: Structural and functional 
properties  

of materials (2 lectures) 

(b) Diffraction based Characterization: Structure of crystalline and non-crystalline materials by  

x-ray diffraction, indexing of lattice planes and lattice parameter determination, electron and  

neutron diffraction, small angle scattering (9 lectures) 

(c) Introduction to Electron Microscopy: Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). (3 lectures) 

 

PHL7XX2 (Characterization of Materials by Microscopy and Spectroscopy) [1-0-0] 

(a) Optical microscopy, Polarization Microscopy, Fluorescence Microscopy, Phase contrast  

Microscopy, Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM) and Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)  

(b) Spectroscopic based Characterization:UV-Vis-NIR, FTIR, Photoluminescence (14 lectures) 

 

PHL7XX3(Functional Properties of Materials) [1-0-0] 

(a) Electrical properties: Resistivity (Four probe and Van der Pauw method), 
Magnetoresistance  

and Hall effect. (5 lectures) 

(b) Magnetic properties: Magnetization and magnetic moment, Measurement of 



Magnetization  

by force and by induction, Magnetic Hysteresis, Magnetic susceptibility, Principles of Electron  

Paramagnetic Resonance and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR).(9 lectures) 

 

Textbook  

1. Zhang, S., Li, L. and Kumar, A., Materials Characterization Techniques, CRC Press, 2008 
2. Mertz, J., Introduction to Optical Microscopy, 2nd Edition, Cambridge University Press, 2019 
 

Self-Learning Material  

1. Shankaran, S., Materials Characterization, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Metallurgical & Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106034/. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  



Title Magnetism and Superconductivity Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce magnetism and superconductivity principles and their applications 

2. Impart advanced concepts of magnetic materials in modern research 

 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understand atomic origin of spin and magnetism and get insight into manifestation 
of quantum mechanics at macro level.  

2. Grasp in-depth knowledge of magnetism and its modern application   

 

Contents  

Brief introduction: Magnetic moment, magnetic dipole, Magnetization and angular momentum 
(2 lectures) 

Isolated magnetic moment: Atom in a magnetic field, Susceptibility, Diamagnetism, 
Paramagnetism, Semiclassical treatment of paramagnetism, Langevin and Brillouin Theory  

Ground state of ion and Hund‟s rule, spin-orbit coupling L-S and j-j coupling, Adiabatic 
Demagnetization (8 lectures) 

Magnetic interactions: Dipole-dipole, Exchange, Origin of exchange, direct, indirect and 
anisotropic exchange (4 lectures) 

Magnetic Order: Ferromagnetism, Weiss model, Antiferromagnetism, Weiss model of 
antiferromagnetism, Ferrimagnetism, Helical order, Spin glass (5 lectures) 

Concept of broken order and symmetry, Landau theory of ferromagnetism, Phase transition, 
Magnons, Spin waves (4 lectures)  

Magnetic domains, domain walls, Anisotropy, Domain observation and Hysteresis (5 lectures) 

Band Magnetism: Free electron model, Pauli paramagnetism, Stoner criterion, Landau levels, 
Landau diamagnetism (5 lectures) 

Device applications: Magnetic data storage, magneto-optic effect, magnetic semiconductors, 
Giant Magneto Resistance, Spintronics devices (4 lectures) 

Superconductivity and related effects, superconducting materials and their applications, 
Josephson junction and SQUID (5 lectures) 



 

 

Textbook  

1. Culity B. D. and Graham, C. D., Introduction to magnetic materials, Addison-Wesley, 1972 

2. Blundell, S., Magnetism in Condensed Matter, Oxford University Press, 2001 

3. Annett, J. F., Superconductivity, Superfluids and Condensates, Oxford University Press, 2004 

 

Self Learning Material  

1. O‟Handley, R., Magnetic Materials, MIT Open Course-Materials Science and Engineering, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/materials-science-and-engineering/3-45-magnetic-materials-
spring-2004/index.htm 

 

 

 

  



Title Introduction to Medical Physics Number PH7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The instructor will 

1. Introduce physics concepts and principles relevant for medicine and health  
2. Provide the introduction of modern diagnostic tools and various technology to medical 

research and to the healthcare arena in general that is set to revolutionize the way we cure 
diseases. 

 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to get an insight into: 

1. Aspects of physics with engineering for biological applications  
2. Contribution of physics in the development of medical diagnostics  
 

Contents  

PH7XX1 (Radiological imaging techniques) [1-0-0] 

(a) Physics in Medical research: Interaction of radiation with matter, Interaction of photons  

with tissues, molecules, cells and organs, Elastic and inelastic scattering, Thomson and  

Compton Scattering. (6 lectures) 

(b) Radiological imaging: X-ray imaging and computerized Tomography (CT), Radioisotope  

imaging, Positron–emission Tomography, Introduction to the image analysis. (8 lectures) 

PH7XX2 (Non-radiological imaging techniques) [1-0-0] 

(a) Non-radiological imaging: Polarization Microscopy, Confocal Microscopy, Fluorescence 
Microscopy and Phase Contrast Microscopy, Breaking the diffraction limit in microscopy, 
Scanning near-field optical microscopy (SNOM), Principles of Nuclear Magnetic resonance and 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging, functional MRI. (14 lectures) 

PH7XX3 (Physics in Therapeutics) [1-0-0] 

(a) Plasma for Medicine: Introduction of low temperature plasma technology to medical  

research, plasma chemistry, fundamentals of non-equilibrium plasmas and cell biology. Cold  

plasma applications in the inactivation of pathogens, anti-bacterial coatings, wound healing,  

electrosurgery, cancer treatment and dentistry. (10 lectures) 

(b) Nuclear Medicine: Radioactivity, Production of radionuclides, Radiation therapy for 
cancer  

treatment. (4 lectures) 



 

Textbook  

1. Cho, Z-H., Jones, J. and Singh, M., Foundations of Medical Imaging, 1st EditionWiley 
Interscience, 1993 

2. Pryma, D. A., Nuclear Medicine, 1st Edition, Oxford University Press, 2015 
3. Murphy, D. B. and Davidson, M. W., Fundamental of Light Microscopy and Electronic 

Imaging, 2nd Edition, Wiley-Blackwell, 2012 
 

Reference Books 

1. Toyokuni, S., Ikehara, Y., Kikkawa, F. and Hori, M. (2018), Plasma Medical Science, 1st 
Edition, Academic Press. 

 

Self-Learning Material 

1. Department of Electrical Engg, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105091/  
2. Jasanoff, A., MIT Open courseware, Noninvasive Imaging in Biology and Medicine,  

https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/nuclear-engineering/22-56j-noninvasive-imaging-in-biology-
and  

medicine-fall-2005/index.htm. 

 

Preparatory Course Material  

1. Department of Physics, IIT Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115102017/. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  



Title Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic Number PHL7XX0 
Systems 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives 

To understand the electronic transport mechanism in mesoscopic systems. 

Learning Outcomes 

Nanodevice fabrication will be much easier than before. 

Contents 

An atomistic view of electrical resistance: Energy level diagram, what makes electrons flow, 
the quantum of conductance, potential profile, Coulomb blockade, towards Ohm‟s law. (8 
lectures) 

Schrodinger equation and Self-consistent field: Hydrogen atom, Method of finite differences, 
the self-consistent field procedure, relation to the multi-electron picture, bonding, multi-
electron picture, basis functions as a computational tool, basis function as a conceptual tool, 
equilibrium density matrix. (10 lectures) 

Band Structure:Examples of 1D and 2D solids, common semiconductors, effect of spin-orbit 
coupling, Quantum wells, wires, dots, and nanotubes, density of states, minimum resistance 
of a wire, velocity of a sub-band electron. (10 lectures) 

Capacitance and Level broadening:Model Hamiltonian, electron density/density matrix, 
quantum vs electrostatic capacitance, open systems, local density of states, lifetime, what 
constitutes a contact? (5 lectures) 

Coherent and Non-coherent transport:Density matrix, inflow/outflow, transmission, 
overview of non-coherent transport, why does an atom emit light? Inflow/outflow, some 
ideas on phonons, atoms to transistor, quantum transport equations, physics of Ohm‟s law, 
where is the heat dissipated? Where is the voltage drop? (9 lectures) 

 Textbook 

1.Datta, S., Quantum transport: atoms to transistor, 2011, 2nd ed. Cambridge University 

Reference Books 

2.Zwanzig, R., Non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, Oxford University Press 

Online Course Material 

1. Datta, S., Fundamentals to Nanoelectronics:https://nanohub.org/courses/fon1 

  



Title Physics of Solar Cells Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Make the students understand the physical principle behind different types of solar cells. 

2. Make the students understand the role of quality of light, types of materials, and device 
fabrication techniques. 

3. Make the students understand the inexpensive ways to fabricate the solar cells. 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Fabricate unconventional solar cells. 

2. Increase the efficiency of the solar cells by applying the theoretical knowledge. 

Contents 

Basic Concepts of Solar Cell: PV cells and modules, photocurrent and quantum efficiency, 
open circuit voltage, short circuit current, parasitic resistance (3 lectures) 

Role of light: Solar resources, Equilibrium condition under illumination, available work, 
photocurrent, dark current.  (4 lectures) 

Properties of semiconductor: bands in crystals, density of states, electron distribution 
function, electron and hole densities, impurities and doping, drift current, diffusion 
current. (8 lectures) 

Generation and Recombination: semiconductor transport equations, generation and 
recombination, photogeneration, types of recombination. (5 lectures) 

Junction: Origin of photovoltaic action, metal semiconductor junction, ohmic contacts, p-n 
junction, p-i-n junction, p-n heterojunction, junctions in organic materials. (6 lectures) 

Analysis of p-n junction: formation of p-n junction, calculation of depletion width, 
calculation of carrier and current densities, p-n junction in dark, p-n junction under 
illumination, p-n junction as a photovoltaic cell. (8 lectures) 

Monocrystalline Solar Cells: Materials and Design, silicon material properties, band 
structure and optical absorption, doping, recombination and carrier transport. (3 
lectures) 

Thin film solar cells: Materials, amorphous silicon, defects in amorphous material, 
absorption, doping, stability, design of the solar cell. (3 lectures) 

Strategies for high efficiency: multiple band gap, tandem cells, principles of cooling and 



hot carrier solar cell, impact ionization solar cells. (2 lectures) 

 

Textbook 

1.  J., Nelson, The Physics of Solar Cells, Imperial College Press, (2003),. 

 Reference Books 

1. P.,Wurfel, U., Wurfel, (2016), Physics of Solar Cell, Willey VCH. 

2. S.,Fonash, (2010), Solar Cell Device Physics, Academic Press. 

Online Course Material 

1. Buonassisi, T., Fundamentals of Photovoltaics, 2011, MIT OpenCourseWare 
:http://ocw.mit.edu/2-627F11 

 

 

  



Title Fundamentals of Plasma and Fusion Science Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. present the fundamental principles of basic plasma and plasma behavior by pointing out 
specific plasma properties useful in technological applications.  

2. Also, provide an overview of fusion plasma science and its consequences in the 21st century 
for the benefit of mankind. 

 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understand the important scientific and technical terms of plasma.  
2. Use mathematical knowledge in the solution of plasma physics problems. 
3. Recognize the importance of plasma based controlled thermonuclear fusion. 
 

Course Content 

Introduction of plasma-Plasmas in nature and applications, Relevant concepts from gas 
(kinetic) theory, Debye Shielding, Definition of plasma and relevant characteristic 
parameters, Collision rates and mean-free paths. (6 Lectures) 

Single particle motions-Charged particle motion in uniform electromagnetic field, Charged 
particle motion in non-uniform magnetostatic field, Charged particle motion in time varying 
electromagnetic fields, Adiabatic invariants. (4 Lectures) 

Plasma fluid theory-Continuity equations, Convective derivative, Equations of state, Single fluid 
approximation, MHD, MHD equilibria, Generalised Ohm‟s Law. (8 Lectures) 

Waves and instabilities in plasmas-Cold plasma waves, Thermal effects on plasma waves, 
Electron plasma waves, Electromagnetic waves in plasma, Equilibrium and stability, Two-
stream instability. (8 Lectures)  

Plasma generation and properties- Concepts of plasma generation in laboratory, Plasma 
sheath, Particle and energy balance, Scaling laws. (8 Lectures) 

Concept of Fusion Plasma Science-Thermonuclear fusion burn basics,Fusion Reaction, 
Thermonuclear fusion, Power balance, Ignition, Tokamaks, Fuel resources, Tokamak 
economics. (8 Lectures)  

 

Text Books  

1. F.F. Chen, Introduction to Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion, Volume 1: Plasma 
Physics, NY, Plenum Press, 1984. 

2. John Wesson, Tokamaks, Clarendon Press- Oxford, 2004. 
 

Reference Books 



1. R.J Goldston and Paul H. Rutherford, Introduction to Plasma Physics, Institute of Physics 
Publishing, Bristol 1995. 

2. R. Dendy, Plasma Physics: An Introductory Course, Cambridge, Cambridge University 
Press, 1993. 

 

Online course material 

1. Tripathi, V.K.,Plasma Physics: Fundamentals and Applications , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115102020/. 

 

 

 

  



Title Introduction to Quantum Technologies Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide various facets of frontiers of quantum technological domains and its understanding 
from the beginner‟s perspective. 

 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. In understanding fundamental principles of quantum state engineering. 
2. Apply modern quantum state engineered tools in advanced domain of physics 
 

Contents  

Non-classical States Generation: Generation of Single Photon, Heralded Photon and Photon 
added/subtracted states, NOON State. (6 Lectures)  

Random Number Generation (RNG): True RNG Generation, Validation and relevant 
experimental details. (6 Lecture) 

Photon Statistics: Detailed analysis of Photon Statistics and higher-order moments for non-
classical states and quantum Metrology. (6 Lecture) 

Quantum State Engineering and tomography: Methods to generate engineered quantum states 
and its applications, Quantum State Tomography (QST). (6 Lectures)  

Quantum Cryptography: Introduction to Quantum Cryptography. (6 Lectures) 

Quantum Computation: Physical realization of quantum computers, and algorithms, qubits 
using photons and superconducting quits, modern quantum algorithms.  (6 Lectures) 

Open Quantum Systems: Introduction to Open quantum system and its Technological 
Implementation. (6 Lecture) 

Textbooks 

1. Agarwal, G. S., Quantum Optics, Cambridge University Press, 2012.  
2. Banerjee, S., Open Quantum Systems: Dynamics of Nonclassical Evolution, Springer and 

Hindustan Book Agency, 2018. 
Reference Books 

1. Evans, M. W., Luks, A., Perina, Jan., Phase in Optics, World Scientific Publishing Company, 
1997. 

Self-Learning Material   

1. Prof Dipan Ghosh, Quantum Information and Computing Indian Institute of Technology 
Bombay, https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115101092/. 

 



Title Laser Technologies Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives 

1. This course aims to provide the student with a basic understanding of Lasers and an 
extended knowledge of the Laser-based technologies. 

Learning Outcomes 

2. The course provides students with knowledge of laser physics and introduces them to 
nonlinear optics, laser interferometer, and spectroscopy applications. Also, it provides a 
good understanding of the critical laser parameters important for their use in various real-
world applications such as: quantum optics, quantum technologies, telecommunications, 
industrial material processing, sensing, bio-medicine, imaging, ranging and automobile 
industry. 

Course Contents  

Fundamentals of Lasers: Absorption, Spontaneous emission and Stimulated emission, Einstein 
coefficients and their significance,Lasing mechanisms, Laser oscillator, Laser characteristics, 
Principles for operation of Lasers, modes and mode selection, Temporal & Spatial 
Coherence, comparison of laser with conventional sources of light, Laser Line width and Line 
broadening mechanisms, Gaussian Beams and optical resonators. (7 lectures) 

Types of Lasers: rate equations, CW lasers, and Pulsed Lasers, Gas lasers, solid state lasers, 
semiconductor lasers, Dye Lasers and Fiber lasers, Spectral coverage with current Laser 
technologies. (7 lectures) 

Generation of short and Ultrashort pulses: Q-Switching, Mode locking, Chirping and Pulse 
compression, YAG Lasers, State-of–art-lasers (Ti: Sapphire Lasers and Fiber Lasers). (7 
lectures) 

Nonlinear Optics: Second and Third order nonlinear susceptibilities and nonlinear optical 
phenomena, Self-phase modulation in fibers, broadband and supercontinuum sources. (6 
lectures) 

Laser Interferometry:  Michelson & Mach-Zehnder Interferometer, Sagnac Interferometer, 
HOM interferometer, Shearing Interferometer, and its connection to spatial Coherence, 
Fabry-Perot interferometer, LIGO, applications. (7 lectures) 

Laser Spectroscopy: Four-wave mixing, Terahertz generation (Optical rectification in a 
nonlinear medium), Transient absorption/reflection spectrometer. (8 lectures) 

Text Books   

1. Sigman, A., Lasers, Mill Valley, Calif. University Science Books, 1986 

2. Rulliere, C., FemtosecondLaserPulses, Springer, 2003. 

3. Yariv A & Pochi, Y., Photonics, Oxford University Press, 2006. 

Reference books  

1. Shen. Y. R., The Principles of Nonlinear Optics, Wiley-Interscience, 2002. 



2. Dexheimer. S. L., Terahertz Spectroscopy, CRC Press, 2008. 

Self-Learning course material 

1. Unique properties of lasers and their applications, Manabendra Chandra, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104104085/. 

Preparatory course material 

1. Understanding Lasers and Fiber Optics, Prof. Shaoul Ezekiel 
https://ocw.mit.edu/resources/res-6-005-understanding-lasers-and-fiberoptics-spring-
2008/. 

 

 

  



Title Computational Materials Science Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Help in understanding the physical properties of materials. 
2. Help in implementing the theoretical concepts to compute materials properties. 

 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Learn theoretical concepts of different computational techniques in materials science. 
2. Simulate and compute material properties using density functional theory, molecular 

dynamics and Monte Carlo methods. 
 

Contents 

(Fractal 1) PHL7XX1 Basic concepts in Density Functional Theory (DFT) (1-0-0) 

Uniform electron gas, Thomas-Fermi model, The Hohenberg-Kohn theorems, formulation of 
DFT, Kohn-Sham variational principle, Local/spin density approximation (LDA/LSDA), 
Generalized-gradient approximations (GGAs), Orbital dependent functional, Hybrid 
functionals, Introduction to Quantum Espresso. (14 lectures) 

(Fractal 2) PHL7XX2 Molecular dynamics Simulations (1-0-0) 

Equations of motion, integrators, Interaction potential models, Force calculations, Long-
range corrections, Molecular dynamics in various ensembles, Advanced MD techniques, 
Linear response theory and Introduction to LAMMPS & GROMACS. (14 lectures) 

(Fractal 3) PHL7XX3 Monte Carlo Simulations (1-0-0) 

Monte Carlo integration, Importance sampling, Metropolis algorithm, Detailed balance, Free 
energy calculations, Widom insertion and Grand canonical Monte Carlo. (14 lectures) 

 

Textbook 

1. Sholl, D, and Steckel, J. A., Density Functional Theory: A Practical Introduction, Wiley-
Interscience 2009. 

2. Frenkel, D, and Smit, B., Understanding Molecular Simulation: From algorithms to 
applications, Academic Press 2001. 

3. Landau, D. P. and Binder, K., A Guide to Monte Carlo Simulations in Statistical Physics, 
3rd Edition, Cambridge University Press 2009. 

 

Reference Books 

1. Martin, R. M., Electronic Structure Basic Theory and Practical Methods, Cambridge 
University Press 2004. 

2. Allen, M. P., and Tildesley, D. J., Computer Simulation of Liquids, Oxford University 



Press, 2nd ed. 2017. 
  

Online Course Material 

1. MIT Open Course Ware, 3.320 “Atomistic Computer Modeling of Materials (SMA 5107)”, by 
Ceder, G. and Marzari, N.; Spring 2005, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/materials-science-
and-engineering/3-320-atomistic-computer-modeling-of-materials-sma-5107-spring-2005/ 

2. NPTEL course by Prof. Tembe, B. L., Department of Chemistry, IIT Bombay; 
“Computational Chemistry and Class Molecular Dynamics”; 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104101095/. 

3. LAMMPS MD simulation package https://lammps.sandia.gov/index.html. 
  



Title Soft Matter Physics Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives 

1. To understand theoretical concepts in soft matter physics. 
2. To understand the structural and thermodynamic properties of soft matter materials. 
 

Learning Outcomes 

1. Ability to apply statistical physics concepts to soft matter. 
2. Ability to appreciate the role of self-assembly, liquid crystals, macromolecular solutions 

in technological applications. 
 

Contents 

(Fractal 1) PHL7XX1 Fundamentals of Soft Matter Physics (1-0-0) 

What is soft matter?; time, length and energy scales; intermolecular forces; 
macromolecules; biopolymers; colloids, liquid crystals, membranes and self-assembly; (14 
lectures) 

(Fractal 2) PHL7XX2 Theory of Simple Liquids (1-0-0) 

Densities and distribution functions; energy, pressure and compressibility, YBG hierarchy, 
virial expansion, hard-sphere equation of state and numerical calculation of Lennard-Jones 
systems (14 lectures) 

(Fractal 3) PHL7XX3 Polymer Physics (1-0-0) 

Random walks, model systems, distribution functions, chain statistics, coil-globule 
transition, polymer solutions, flexibility and semi-flexibility, self-avoidance, entanglement, 
viscoelasticity, reptation and Rouse models. (14 lectures) 

Textbook 

1. Doi, M., Soft Matter Physics, Oxford University Press 2014. 
2. Jones, R. A. L., Soft Condensed Matter, Oxford University Press 2002. 

Reference Books 

1. Chaikin, P. M., and Lubensky, T. C., Principles of Condensed Matter Physics, Cambridge 
University Press 

  

Online Course Material 

1. NPTEL course by Profs. Sunil Kumar, P. B., and Menon, G. I.,; “Physics of Soft 
Condensed Matter”; https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115106063/ 

 

  



Title Statistical Methods for Data Analysis Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives: 

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide knowledge on commonly used statistical methods in analyzing physics data. 
 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to, 

1. Understand statistical methods in analyzing physical data. 
 

Contents 

Basic Statistics and Common Probability Distributions: Probability, Random variables, discrete 
andcontinuous probability distributions, cumulative distributions. Mean, variance and 
covariance. Central Limit Theorem. Method of moments. Monte Carlo Methods: 
transformation of PDFs, acceptance-rejection technique. (8 Lectures) 

Bayesian Statistics: Likelihoods, priors and posteriors. Nuisance parameters, systematics 
uncertainties,and marginatization. (8 Lectures) 

Random and Systematic Uncertainties: Error bars and error propagation. Correlation and „error 
matrix‟. Non-Gaussian uncertainties. Techniques for managing systematic uncertainties. 

(8 Lectures) 

Parameter Estimation: Least square regression. Minimization techniques. “Robust” alternatives 
to theleast square method. (8 Lectures) 

Statistical Tests: Hypotheses, test statistics, significance level, power, Neyman-Pearson test, 
statistical trials, likelihood ratio tests, Goodness-of-fit tests. Bayesian approach: posterior 
odds, the Bayes Factor, the Ockham Factor. Method of maximum likelihood. Statistical 
errors, confidence intervals and limits. (10 Lectures) 

 The students will be assigned computer laboratory work based on the above syllabus. 

Textbooks 

1. Louis, L., Statistics for nuclear and particle physics, Addison-Wesley, 1990. 
2. Cowan, G., Statistical Data Analysis, Oxford University Press, 1998. 
 

Self-Learning Material: 

1. Sivia, D. S. and Skilling J., Data Analysis A Bayesian Tutorial, Oxford University Press, 
2nd edition, 2006. 

2. Martin, B. R., Statistics for Physical Science: An Introduction, Academic Press, 1st edition, 
2012. 

Preparatory Course Material: 

1. http://www-library.desy.de/preparch/books/vstatmp_engl.pdf 



 

 

 

 

  



Title Optical Fiber Technology Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives 

1. To understand and gather knowledge on guided wave optics namely fiber optics and its 
applications. 

 

Learning Outcomes  

1. The students will become familiar with the concepts of modes, propagations of optical 
pulses, and nonlinear aspect of light matter interaction inside fibers. 

2. Students will become familiar with fiber characterization/measurement techniques and 
state-of-the-art applications.   

Contents  

(Fractal 1) PHL7XX1 Introduction to Optical Fiber [1-0-0] Vector Nature of Light, Optical 
Fiber – Single and Multimode, Step index and Graded Index Fibers, Ray and Wave picture of 
propagation, Cut-off, mode field diameter, group delay, Gaussian field approximation. (8 
Lectures) 

Transmission Characteristics: The consequences of attenuation and dispersion in Optical 
Fibers: Material, Waveguide, Polarization, Intermodal and Intramodal Dispersion, Group 
velocity Dispersion, Dispersion modified single mode fibers. Fiber Fabrication Methods. (6 
Lectures)  

(Fractal 2)  PHL7XX2 Optical Fibers and Communication [1-0-0] Attenuation, dispersion 
and pulse band width, refractive index profile, bend loss, other parameters. (5 lectures) 

Erbium doped fiber amplifiers: Optical amplification, gain spectrum and bandwidth, noise in 
EDFA, WDM. (4 lectures) 

Fiber optic communications- Dispersion management and WDM systems, bit-error rate, signal-
to-noise ratio, Optical communications. (5 lectures) 

(Fractal 3) PHL7XX3 Nonliear Fiber Optics  [1-0-0]Photonic crystal fibers: Index and 
photonic bandgap guiding mechanism, endless single-mode guidance, fiber optic sensors. (7 
lectures) 

Nonlinear phenomena in optical fibers: Nonlinear refraction, nonlinear pulse propagation, self-
phase modulation, changes in pulse spectra, optical wave breaking, optical solitons, cross-
phase modulation. (7 lectures) 

Textbook  

1. Ghatak, A. K., and Thyagarajan, K., Introduction to Fiber Optics, Cambridge University 
Press 1998. 

2. Agrawal, G. P., Nonlinear fiber optics, Academic press, 4th edition, 2007. 
 

Self-Learning Material  

1. Rastogi, V., Fiber Optics, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115107095/.    



Reference Course Material  

1. Crisp, J. and Elliot, B., Introduction to Fiber Optics, 3rd edition, Newnes, 2005. 
 

 

  



 

Title Energy Harvesting Technologies Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective  

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Make the students understand different energy harvesting technologies from 
unconventional resources and waste energy management. 

 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understand the energy harvesting technologies and their applications in different domains. 
 

Contents  

Energy sources: Non-renewable and renewable energy sources, Energy demand and crisis 
nexus, waste energies and their harvesting (5 lectures) 

Harvesting Waste Mechanical Energy: Principle of piezoelectricity, piezoelectric materials, their 
characterizations, common piezoelectric materials e.g. PZT, ZnO. Recent trends on new 
materials ceramics and polymer composites; Principles of energy harvesting using 
piezoelectric effect, Electrical equivalent modelling, examples of energy harvesting systems 
e.g. Human body motion based, human shoe based and human joint based energy 
harvesters, Energy from natural sources: wind and water flow, Energy from transportation 
etc (15 lectures) 

Nanopiezoelectric materials and devices: Nanopiezoelectric effect, materials for 
nanogenerators, principles of nanogenerators, devices, characterization, current trends in 
materials. (7 lectures) 

Thermal Waste Energy harvesting: Thermoelectric effect and related principles, such as 
Seebeck and Peltier effect, Thomson effect, Thermoelectric device materials and 
characterization, Strategies for improving thermoelectric performance, Nanostructured 
thermoelectric materials; principle of pyroelectric effect, pyroelectric and electrocaloric 
coefficients, pyroelectric figure of merit, pyroelectric materials, Thermal phase change 
materials for waste energy harvesting, principles and materials. (10+05 lectures) 

 

Textbook  

1. Priya, S., Inman, D. J., Energy Harvesting Technologies, Springer (2009). 
2. Mescia, L., Losito, O., Prudenzano, F.,  Innovative Materials and Systems for Energy 

Harvesting Applications, IGI Global (2015)  
 



Reference Books  

1. Kazmierski, T. J., Beeby, S., Energy Harvesting Systems, Springer (2011). 
2. Yang, B., Liu, H., Liu, J., Lee, C., Micro and Nano Energy Harvesting Technologies, Artech 

House (2015) 
 

Online Course Material  

1. W. Tester, Jefferson,  Kazimi, Mujid S., Shao-Horn, Yang, Ghoniem, Ahmed F. 
Fundamentals of Advanced Energy Conversion,  
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mechanical-engineering/2-60-fundamentals-of-advanced-
energy-conversion-spring-2004/# 

 

 

 

  



Title Solar Energy Technologies Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective  

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Make the students understand energy technologies such as solar photovoltaics, solar 
thermal together with solar radiation. 

 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understand the solar technologies and their applications. 
Contents  

Basic Concepts of Solar Radiation: Radiation fundamentals, types of radiation, measurements, 
and its usages. (10 lectures) 

Solar photovoltaics: Principles of solar cells, their types and working mechanisms, generation 
and recombination of carriers, types of recombination, Details about p-n homo and hetero 
junctions, inorganic and organic junction based PV devices, analysis and characterization. 
Effect of temperature on device performance. (10 lectures) 

Solar thermal: Solar thermal technologies (concentrating and non-concentrating) and their 
operating principles, classification based on temperature ranges and their applications, 
Component analysis, Introduction to solar thermal plants and energy generation. (10 
lectures) 

Energy storage: Electrical energy storage using batteries and supercapacitors, principles, 
issues and challenges, current state of the art; Thermal energy storage using phase change 
and thermochemical means, principles, materials, issues and challenges. (10 lectures) 

Textbook  

1. Nelson, J., (2003), The Physics of Solar Cells, Imperial College Press. 
2. Sukhatme, S. P., Naik, J. K., Solar Energy: Principles of thermal collection and storage; 

TMH, 2017. 
 

Reference Books  

1. Wurfel, P., Wurfel, U., (2016), Physics of Solar Cell, Willey VCH. 
2. Duffie, J. A., Beckman, W. A., Solar Engineering of Thermal Processes, John Wiley & Sons 

4th Ed, 2013. 
Online Course Material  

1. Buonassisi, T., Fundamentals of Photovoltaics, 2011, MIT OpenCourseWare : 
http://ocw.mit.edu/2-627F11. 

 

  



Title Quantum Optics and Engineering Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide various aspects of nonclassical/quantum light and its manifestation. 
2. Basic understanding of novel applications of light matter interaction. 
3. Introduce various aspects of Photon distribution and its relevance to applications in 

quantum optics and engineering.  
 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understanding the fundamental principles of quantum optics. 
2. The students will become familiar with concepts such as squeezing, lasing and atom optics 
3. Appreciate and apply quantum optics in newer frontiers of physics. 
 

Contents  

Introduction to Lasers (3 Lectures)  

Quantum theory of radiation: Quantum theory of the free electromagnetic field (3 Lectures) 

Coherent and squeezed states of radiation: Radiation from a classical current; coherent 
states; squeezed state physics and its detection.  (6 Lectures) 

Generation of Entangled Photons and Photon Statistics: Spontaneous Parametric Down-
Conversion (SPDC) process, Entangled photon detection, HOM and Franson Interferometer, 
Hanbury-Twiss Interferometer. (7 Lectures) 

Quantum distribution theory: Q, P and W distributions. (5 Lectures) 

Photon-photon interferometry: Photon detection and quantum coherence functions. (5 
Lectures) 

Atom-field interaction: Atom-field interaction Hamiltonian; density matrix of two-level atom 
with a single mode field. (7 Lectures) 

Lasing without inversion, coherent trapping, electromagnetically induced transparency: 
Basic concepts of these quantum interference phenomena.  (6 Lectures) 

Textbook:  

1. Mandel, L. and Wolf, E., Optical Coherence and Quantum Optics, Cambridge University 
Press, 1995.  

2. Scully, M. O. and Zubairy, M.  S., Quantum Optics, Cambridge University Press, 1997. 
3. Loudon, R., The Quantum Theory of Light, Oxford University Press, 2000. 
 

Reference Book: 



1. Agarwal, G. S., Quantum Optics, Cambridge University Press, 2012.  
 

Self-Learning Material: 

1.  Satyanarayana, M. V.,  Department of Physics, IIT Madras, Quantum Optics,  
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115106067/ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  



Title Cold Plasma Technologies Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The instructor will: 

1. provide an overview of the importance of cold plasma technologies. 
2. present an overview of commercially important plasma sources, including the fundamental 

principles of their operation and diagnostics.  
Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. understand the operating principles of the most significant types of experimental plasma 
sources. 

2. acquire conceptual understanding of plasma measurement tools, different vacuum pumps 
and plasma systems design concepts.  

 

Course Content 

Electrical breakdown of gases- Background ionization, Saturation regime, Townsend discharge 
and electrical breakdown condition of gases, Paschen Curve, Theory of low-pressure DC 
glow discharge. (10 Lectures) 

RF-driven gas discharges-Capacitive coupling, Inductive coupling, Microwave driven, 
Magnetically enhancement. (5 Lectures) 

High pressure gas discharges- Plasma Arc discharge and Glow discharge concept, Cold 
atmospheric pressure discharge, Dielectric Barrier Discharges, Cold Plasma Jets, 
Microplasmas. (5 Lectures) 

Vacuum Pumps and Instrumentation-Mechanical, diffusion, turbo molecular pumps. Vacuum 
gauges, Gas regulators, Residual gas analysers, Leak detection. (5 Lectures) 

Plasma Diagnostics- Overview of plasma diagnostics, Langmuir probe, Magnetic probe, 
Emissive probe, Measurement of circuit parameters including current, voltage and power, 
Fundamentals of emission of radiations by plasmas and their measurements. (8 Lectures)      

Laboratory Plasma Applications- Plasma treatment of surfaces, Plasma deposition of the 
surfaces, Plasma Etching, Cold plasma applications in health, food and agriculture, Plasma 
Lighting devices, Nanoscale fabrications and plasma for biomedicines. (8 lectures) 

 

Text Books  

1. Yuri P. Raizer, Gas Discharge Physics, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 1991. 
2. J. Reece Roth, Industrial Plasma Engineering, Vol. 1 & 2, Institute of Physics Publishing, 

2003. 
3. P.I John, Plasma Sciences and the Creation of Wealth, Tata McGraw-Hill Education 

Company Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 2005. 



 

Reference Books 

1. I. H. Huchinson, Principles of plasma diagnostics, Cambridge University Press, 1987 
2. Michael Lieberman and Allan J. Lichtenberg, Principles of Plasma Discharges and Materials 

Processing, John Wiley, 2005. 
 

Online course material 

1. Tripathi, V.K.,Plasma Physics: Fundamentals and Applications , NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115102020/. 

 

  



Title Critical Phenomena and Renormalization Group Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Help in understanding the basic concepts of critical phenomena. 

2. Help in grasping the concepts of the renormalization group 

 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1.  Grasp the concept of universality in phase transitions, crucial for understanding critical 
phenomena. 

2. Understand scaling and renormalization group ideas. 

 

Contents    

Introduction to critical phenomena: Phase Transitions and Transfer Matrix, Order Parameter 
and Cluster Properties, Stochastic Processes and Phase Transitions, The Ising model, 
the mean field, correlation functions. (10 Lectures) 

Landau theory:  The Landau theory of phase transitions, Universality within the Mean Field 
Approximation, Critique of the Landau approximation, and the Ginzburg criterion, Power 
Counting and the Role of Dimension Four. (10 Lectures) 

Real-space Renormalization Group: Renormalization Group (RG) transformation of the 
Hamiltonian and its fixed points, Relations between critical exponents from RG, some 
applications of the linearized RG transformations. (6 Lectures) 

Momentum-space Renormalization Group: RG transformation in wave number space, 
Scaling dimension: anomalous and normal, Partition function and fixed points for the 
Gaussian model. (10 Lectures) 

Two-dimensional models: The X Y model, Nonlinear sigma-models. (6 Lectures) 

 

Textbook 

1.Ma, S. K., (1976), Modern theory of critical phenomena. Benjamin, Philadelphia. 

2.Bellac, M. L., (1991), Quantum and Statistical Field Theory, Clarendon Press, Oxford. 

 

Reference Books 



1. Zinn-Justin., J., (1989), Quantum field theory and critical phenomena, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford. 

 

Online Course Material 

 

1. Santra, S. B., Advanced Statistical Mechanics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati,http://nptel.ac.in/courses/115103028/. 

2. Kardar, M., 8.334 Statistical Mechanics II, Spring 2014, MIT OpenCourseWare 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,https://ocw.mit.edu 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  



Title Non-perturbative aspects of Quantum Field Number PHL7XX0 
Theory 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Help in understanding the basic ideas of non-perturbative phenomena. 

2. Help in grasping the basic models of non-perturbative quantum field theory (QFT). 

 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Grasp the concepts of QFT beyond the perturbation regimes. 

2.Understand some of the important tools needed for non-perturbative QFT. 

 

Contents 

Introduction to general properties of QFT: Relativistic covariance, microcausality and 
ultraviolet singularities, Wightman functions and their properties; Euclidean QFT, 
Osterwalder-Schrader condition, local structure of QFT, Haag theorem; Schwinger 
model, Thirring model. (6 Lectures) 

Kinks and Domain Walls:  Humps of energy with a topological basis. Formation of kinks and 
domain walls during a phase transition, Kibble and Kibble-Zurek mechanisms. Action of 
kink and domain walls. (8 Lectures) 

Solitons and Instantons: Relativistic quantum field theories starting from classical solutions 
of the corresponding non- nonlinear field equations. Classical field equations belong to 
either the Minkowskian metric or to Euclidean equations. The Minkowskian solutions will 
have finite energy with a localised, non-dispersive energy density; referred to as 
solitons. Correspondence between classical soliton solutions of any given field theory 
and extended-particle states of the quantised version of that theory will be discussed. 
Instantons are localised finite-action classical solutions of the Euclidean version of the 
field equations of any given model.  They lead to tunnelling effects that can significantly 
affect the structure of the vacuum state. It will be discussed how the existence of a 
non-zero topological index, in the instantons, leads to the generation of a family of 
vacuum states, characterized by a vacuum angle theta. (20 Lectures) 

Non-Linear Sigma Model: Models possessing global symmetries non-linearly realized on the 
fields.  This model has an 0(N) symmetry, the field being a N-vector of fixed length. In 
this context, the 1/N expansion will be discussed. Also, discussed will be the connection 
of the O(2) model to the sine-Gordan and massive Thirring models. (8 Lectures) 

 



Textbook 

1.Rajaraman, R., (1989), Solitons and Instantons, North-Holland. 

2.Abdalla, E., Abdalla, M. C. B., and Rothe, K. D., (2001), Non-perturbative methods in 2 
Dimensional QFT, World Scientific, Singapore. 

 

Reference Books 

1. Zinn-Justin., J., (1989), Quantum field theory and critical phenomena, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford. 

 

Online Course Material 

1. Govindarajan, S., Classical Field Theory, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Physics, 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras,http://nptel.ac.in/courses/115106058/. 

 

2. Hanany, A., 8.871 Selected Topics in Theoretical Particle Physics: Branes and Gauge 
Theory Dynamics, MIT OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology,https://ocw.mit.edu 

 

 

  



Title Nuclear Engineering Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide various aspects of Nuclear Engineering from perspective nuclear power plant and 
its safety.  

 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. In understanding fundamental principles of nuclear engineering. 
 

Contents  

PHL7XX1  Nuclear Reactor and Safety  (2-0-0) 
Introduction to Nuclear Physics: (2 Lecture).  

Nuclear Decay Series: U, Th, Pu and Other radioactive sources and their decay series; basic 
understanding of differential cross-section and half-life. (6 Lecture) 

Nuclear Reactors: Reactor Physics and Pressurized Water Reactor, Boiling Water Reactor, Fast-
Breeder Reactor (FBR), Reactor Design (Heavy Water, Liquid Metal and Gas). (12 Lecture) 

Nuclear Safety: Reactor Safety, Structural Mechanics, Accidents and Contamination. (8 
Lecture) 

 

PHL7XX2  Fluid Flow and Power cycles   (1-0-0) 

Fluid Flow and Power Cycles: Single-Phase Flow & Two-Phase Flow, Heat-Exchangers Design 
and Different Power Cycles. (14 Lectures) 

 

Textbooks:  

1. Glasstone, S.  and Sesonske, A., Nuclear Reactor Engineering, D. Van Nostrand Company, 
1967. 

2. Knief, R. A. Nuclear Engineering: Theory and Technology of Commercial Nuclear Power. 
2nd ed. La Grange Park, 2008. 

 

Reference books:  

1. Oka, Y., (Eds.), Nuclear Reactor Design, Springer-Verlag, Tokyo, 2010.  
 

 



Self-Learning Material:  

1.  Kannan,  I.,  Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT Bombay, Nuclear Engineering, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112101007/. 

 

 

  



Title Vacuum Systems and Thin Film Technology Number PHL8XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite Introduction to Characterization & Advanced   
Condensed Matter Physics 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce basic concept of vacuum science and thin film depositions & characterizations 

 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understand the physical concepts behind the thin film depositions by CVD and PVD systems 

2. Knowledge about vacuum pumps and gauges 

3. Design protocols for thin film deposition and characterization 

 

Contents  

Vacuum technology: Production of Vacuum - Mechanical pumps, Diffusion pump, Getter 
and Ion pumps, Cryopumps, Pressure Measurements Gauges, Leak Detection. (5 lectures) 

Physical Vapor Deposition: Hertz Knudsen equation; mass evaporation rate; Knudsen cell, 
Directional distribution of evaporating species, Evaporation of elements, compounds, 
alloys, Raoult‟s law; e-beam, pulsed laser and ion beam evaporation, Glow Discharge and 
Plasma, Sputtering–mechanisms and yield, DC and RF sputtering, Bias sputtering, 
magnetically enhanced sputtering systems, reactive sputtering, Hybrid and Modified PVD- 
Ion plating, reactive evaporation, ion beam assisted sputtering. (11 lectures) 

Chemical Vapor Deposition: reaction chemistry and thermodynamics of CVD; Thermal 
CVD, laser & plasma enhanced CVD, Chemical Techniques - Spray Pyrolysis, Electro-
deposition, Sol- Gel and LB Techniques (8 lectures) 

Nucleation & Growth: capillarity theory, atomistic and kinetic models of nucleation, basic 
modes of thin film growth, stages of film growth & mechanisms, amorphous thin films, 
Epitaxy–homo, hetero and coherent epitaxial layers, lattice misfit and imperfections, 
epitaxy of compound semiconductors. (8 lectures) 

Film Formation and Structure: Capillarity Theory, Atomistic Nucleation Processes, Cluster 
Coalescence and Depletion, Experimental Studies of Nucleation and Growth, Grain 
Structure of Films and Coatings (5 lectures) 

Methods for characterization of film properties: chemical composition, microstructure, 
optical, mechanical and electrical properties (5 lectures) 

 

Textbook  



1. Ohring, M., The materials science of Thin films, Academic Press Ltd, 2nd Edition, 2002 

2. Chopra, K. L., Thin Film Phenomena, McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1969 

3. Smith D. L., Thin Film Deposition: Principles and Practice, McGraw Hill 1995 

 

Self-Learning Material  

1. Shekhar, S. and Gaur, A., Fundamentals of Material Processing Part 2 (Module 2), IIT 
Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104075/ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  



Title Plasma Diagnostics Number PHL8XX0 

Department Physics L-P-T (C) 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for PhD   

Prerequisite Cold Plasma Technologies   

Objectives  

The instructor will: 

1. provide an overview of the important plasma diagnostic and data analysis tools, which 
are used in process development and plasma reactor monitoring. 

2. provide students a critical appreciation of where and when specific techniques are 
applicable.   

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. understand the fundamental principles of electrical, optical and particle measurement 
techniques. 

2. understand quantitatively the validity of plasma measurements.   
3. distinguish process control issues and chalk out strategies for specific plasma process  

Course Content 

Plasma Parameters-Electron and Ion plasma densities, temperature, and particle distribution 
functions. Wall fluxes of charged and neutral species, energy distribution functions. Plasma 
emission. Plasma operating regimes. (7 Lectures) 

Electrical Measurements- Electrical Probes (Langmuir single, double probes, emissive 
proves), Current transformers, Rogowski coil, dielectric charging and laser heated 
techniques. (8 Lectures) 

Optical and Spectroscopic Techniques-Fundamentals of emission of radiation by plasmas. 
Corona equilibrium, Local-thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE), Collinsonal-radiative (CR) 
processes. Line shapes and broadening, i.e., Natural Broadening, Doppler Broadening, Stark 
Broadening, line shifts. Absorption spectroscopy and active techniques including LIF (Laser 
Induced Fluorescence) technique. (12 Lectures) 

Particle Measurements and Process Control-Energy analysers (Ion-energy analyzers, 
Faraday Cup), ion mass spectrometry, process gas analysis in plasmas, process control 
strategies. statistical process analysis, end point detection. (8 lectures) 

Data analysis software and tools- Data analysis introduction and overview of COMSOL, Vsim, 
Oopic-pro, Atomic Data and Analysis Structure, Interactive Data Language, Matlab and 
Origin. (7 lectures) 

Text Books  

1. I. H. Huchinson, Principles of plasma diagnostics, Cambridge University Press, 1987. 
2. P.I John, Plasma Sciences and the Creation of Wealth, Tata McGraw-Hill Education Company 

Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 2005 

 

 



Reference Books 

1. Lochte-Holtgreven, Plasma Diagnostics, AIP Press American Institute of Physics, New York 
(1995) 

2. P.C. Stangeby, Plasma Diagnostics, Vol. 2, Surface analysis and interactions, Academic 
Press, Boston (1989) 

Preparatory Course Material  

1. Ram Prakash, Book Chapter “Recent Trends in Plasma Chemistry and Spectroscopy 
Diagnostics” Research Methodology in Chemical Sciences: Experimental and Theoretical 
Approach, Applied Academic Press, USA (2016). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  



 

Title Materials and device characterization Number PHL8XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite Introduction to Material Characterization   

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce the advanced characterization tools for materials and devices 

 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understand the concepts and theory underlying the modern techniques employed to 
determine semiconductor material and device parameters. 

 

Contents  

Introduction to materials characterization and their necessity including physical, chemical 
and electrical characterization. (2 lectures) 

Structural and crystallographic Characterization: X-ray, neutron and electron diffraction, 
LEED, RHEED, characterization of crystalline and non-crystalline materials. (6 lectures) 

Microscopy techniques: Geometrical optics and optical microscopy, Scanning electron and 
Transmission electron microscopy. (10 lectures) 

Optical spectroscopy: UV-Vis and FTIR spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy with introduction 
vibrational spectroscopic concepts. (4 lectures) 

Magnetic measurement techniques: SQUID magnetometer, temperature and field 
dependent magnetic measurements using PPMS and SQUID, introduction magnetic imaging 
techniques such as MRI and NMRI. (6 lectures) 

Electrical measurement:Drude model introduction, Four probe resistivity measurements, 
Van der Pauw method, Hall measurement, PN junction measurements, Schottky barriers, 
Thermally stimulated current spectroscopy. (6 lectures) 

Low temperature measurements: Introduction to cryogens, Dewars, He-4/3 cryostat, 
Dilution cryostat, Adiabatic demagnetization, Resistance thermometry. (4 lectures) 

Mossbauer spectroscopy techniques: Principle, method, experiments for material 
characterization, X-ray photoelectron/Auger spectroscopy measurements. (4 lectures) 

 

 



Textbook  

1. Schroder, D. K., Semiconductor material and device characterization, Wiley 3rd Edition, 
2015 

2. Zhang, S., Li, L. and Kumar, A., Materials characterization techniques, CRC press, 2008 
3. Egerton, R. F., Physical principles of electron microscopy: An introduction to TEM, SEM and 

AEM, Springer, 2005 
 

Self Learning Material  

1.Biswas, K., NPTEL course: Advanced Characterization Techniques, IIT Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/113104004/     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  



Title Computational Condensed Matter Physics Number PHL8XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–1 [4] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite Computational Materials Science   

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Help in understanding the condensed matter physics concept and their correlation in   

    materials properties. 

2. help students to implement the concept to apply for computing materials properties. 

3. Encourage students to apply the computational condensed matter physics knowledge in 
their research if interested. 

 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Learn the concept of condensed matter and computational aspects for real implementation 

2. Design application driven materials need  

 

Contents  

Basic Concepts in Electronic Structure: Interacting electron & nuclei systems, Forces & 
stress  

theorems, a bit of statistical mechanics and density matrix. Independent electron  

approximation, Exchange & correlation. Periodic solids and electron bands. Uniform electron  

gas model. (5 lectures) 

Hartee-Fock approximation: Non-interacting systems (2 lectures) 

Density Functional Theory (DFT): Thomas-Fermi model, The Hohenberg-Kohn theorems, 
Extension of Hohenberg-Khon theorems, formulation of DFT. The Kohn-Sham vibrational 
principle. (8 lectures) 

Functionals for exchange correlation: Local/ spin density approximation (LDA/LSDA), 
Generalized-gradient approximations (GGAs), Orbital dependent functional, Hybrid functionals. 

Electronic structure of atom and pseudopotential: scattering amplitude and pseudopotentials, 
orthogonalized plane wave (OPWs) and pseudopotentials, Nrom-conserving pseudopotentials, 
unscreening and core correction, Ultrasoft pseudopotentials, Projector augumented waves 
(PAWs) (16 lectures) 

Computation of electronic band structure: Self-consistent solution of coupled Kohn-Sham 



equations, Total energy functionals, Force & stress (5 lectures) 

Practical applications: Introduction to supercells, surfaces, interfaces, phonons and defects, 
other material properties such as magnetic, ferroelectric and piezoelectric properties. Thermal 
properties using phonon dispersion. (6 lectures) 

 

Textbook  

1. Marder, M. P., Condensed Matter Physics, Wiley, 2000 
2. Sholl, D., and Steckel, J. A., Density Functional Theory: A Practical Introduction, Wiley-      

Interscience, 2009 

Reference Books  

1. Martin, R. M., Electronic Structure Basic Theory and Practical Methods, Cambridge 
University Press, 2004 

2. Kittel C. C., Quantum Theory of Solids, John Wiley & Sons Inc, 1987 
3. Journal articles for relevant sections 

Self-Learning Material  

1. Online resources: http://www.quantum-espresso.org/ (For computational purpose and 
online lectures and reading materials) 

 

 

 

 

  



Title Semiconductor Device Technology Number PHL8XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite Advanced Condensed Matter Physics   

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce basic properties of semiconductors, physical principles and operational 
characteristics of semiconductor devices 

2. Put forth advanced device issues relevant to state-of-the-art integrated-circuit 
technologies. 
 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Familiarize with the physical concepts behind the solid state electronics devices 

 

Contents  

Physics and Properties of Semiconductors: crystal structure, energy bands, statistics, Fermi 
level, carrier concentration at thermal equilibrium, carrier transport phenomena, Hall effect, 
recombination, optical and thermal properties, basic properties for semiconductor operation. 
(5 lectures) 

Device Processing Technology: oxidation, diffusion, ion-implantation, deposition, 
lithography, etching and interconnect. (8 lectures) 

p-n Junction: depletion region, diffusion, generation-recombination, current-voltage 
characteristics, junction breakdown, charge storage and transient behavior. (4 lectures) 

Bipolar transistor: transistor action and dependence on device structure, charge control 
switching model, Ebers-Moll Model, current-voltage characteristics, non-ideal and limiting 
effects at extremes of bias. (6 lectures) 

State-of-the-Art Bipolar Transistor Technology: poly-si emitters, narrow base, structural 
tradeoffs in optimizing performance. (3 lectures) 

Metal-Semiconductor Contacts: equilibrium, idealized metal semiconductor junctions, 
nonrectifying (ohmic) contacts, Schottky diodes, tunneling. (4 lectures) 

Metal-Oxide-Silicon System: MOS structure, capacitance, oxide and interface charge 
(charging of traps, tunneling through oxide). (4 lectures) 

MOS Field-Effect Transistor: threshold voltage, derivation of current-voltage characteristics, 
dependence on device structure. (3 lectures) 

State-of-the-Art MOS Technology: small-geometry effects, mobility degradation due to 
channel and oxide fields, velocity saturation, hot-electron effects. (3 lectures) 

Modern CMOS Technologies: CMOS Process flow starting from Substrate selection to 



multilevel metal formation, comparison between bulk and SOI CMOS technologies. (2 
lectures)   

Textbook  

1. Donald , A. N., Semiconductor Physics and Devices, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2007. 
2. Sze, S.M., Physics of Semiconductor Devices, John Wiley & Sons, 2001. 
3. James,P., Deal, M. and Griffin P., Silicon VLSI Technology, Prentice Hall, Electronics and 

VLSI series, 2000 
Self Learning Material  

1. Fonstad, C., Jr, MIT Open course: Microelectronic Devices and Circuits, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-012-
microelectronic-devices-and-circuits-fall-2009/index.htm 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  



Title Understanding Scanning Tunneling Number PHL8XX0 
Microscope 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic Systems   

Objectives 

To understand the principles behind scanning tunneling microscope. 

Learning Outcomes 

One can get acquainted and operate scanning tunneling microscope. 

Contents 

Overview:Tunneling an elementary model, probing electronic structure in atomic scale, 
spatially resolved scanning spectroscopy, lateral resolution, origin of atomic resolution in STM, 
tip-sample interaction effects. (6 lectures) 

Imaging Mechanism:atom-scale tunneling, perturbation approach, image force, the square-
barrier problem, modified Bardeen approach, effect of image force on tunneling, tunneling 
matrix elements, tip wavefunctions, Green‟s function and tip wavefunctions, wavefunctions at 
surfaces, related model, concept of surface states, field emission spectroscopy, atom-beam 
diffraction, first principles theoretical studies. (10 lectures) 

Imaging crystalline surfaces:types of STM images, surfaces with one-dimensional corrugation, 
surface with tetragonal, hexagonal or trigonal symmetry, corrugation inversion, the S-wave-
tip model. (5 lectures) 

Imaging atomic statesand the role of atomic force in tunneling:Slater atomic wavefunctions, 
profiles of atomic states as seen by STM, Na-atom tip model, images of surfaces: Independent 
orbital approximation, effect of atomic force in STM, attractive atomic force as a tunneling 
phenomenon, attractive atomic force and tunneling conductance. (11 lectures) 

Tip-sample Interactions and scanning tunneling spectroscopy:Local modification of sample 
wavefunction, deformation of tip and sample surface, electronics for spectroscopy, nature of 
the spectra, tip-treatment for spectroscopy studies, The Fenestra parameter, ex situ and in 
situ determination of tip DOS. (10 lectures) 

 Textbook 

1.Chen, C. J., Introduction to Scanning Tunneling Microscopy, Oxford University, 2012 

Reference Books 

2.Weisendanger, R., Scanning Probe Spectroscopy and Microscopy, Cambridge Uni. 

Online Course Material1.    Review of Quantum Tunneling/Introduction to 
STM:http://nanohub.org/resources/9600 

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

Teaching Laboratories 



Atomic and Nuclear Physics Laboratory (Course No. PHP6XX0) 

 

S. No. Name of the Experiment 

1.  Recording of Hydrogen Spectra  

2.  Zeeman effect 

3.  Gamma Ray Spectrometer (Energy resolved)  

4.  Alpha particle spectrometer (Energy resolved)  

5.  Radiation Counter for Alpha and Beta Particle (ZnSe for Alpha 

And Plastic scintillation counter for beta particle) 

6.  Radiation Counter for  

Gamma and Beta Particle 

7.  Finding the Plateau region of GM Tube   

8.  Alpha particle counter (only for alpha particle)  

9.  Compton Scattering 

 

Electronics Laboratory (Course No. PHP6XX0) 

 

S. No. Name of Experiment 

1 JFET biasing and its application as an amplifier. 

2 Differential Amplifier as double ended input and single ended output. Differential 
Amplifier as single ended input and double ended output. 

3 Op-Amp circuit and inverting and non-inverting amplifiers. Find out the output 
offset voltage, maximum output current, slew rate, and power bandwidth. 

4 Summing, subtractor, differentiator, and integrator. 

5 Four types of negative feedback such as VCVS, VCIS, ICVS, and ICIS will used to 
show the reduction of non-linear distortion and output offset voltage. 

6 Active Butterworth low-pass, high-pass, wide bandpass, and narrow bandpass 
filters. 

7 Active diode circuits and comparator as peak detector, limiter, DC clamper, limit 
detector. 

8 Wave shaping circuit by using Schmitt trigger. 

9 The Wien Bridge Oscillator, LC Oscillator circuit  



10 Use of 555 timer for astable multivibrator, monostable multivibrator and construct 
an alarm circuit. 

11 Different logic gates such as NOT, AND, OR, NAND, NOR, XOR gates 

12 RS NAND latch, clocked D Latch, JK Flip Flop and verify frequency division 
function, T Flip-Flop, 

13 To study the performance of a quartz-controlled TTL clock oscillator. 

14 Monostable, astable multivibrator using TTL circuits. 

15 Half-adder, full-adder, subtractor, construction of four-bit adder, and four-bit 
adder-subtractor  

16 Use of Shift Register for showing SIPO, PIPO, and PIPO operation. 

17  Operation of a binary ripple up-counter, and down counter. 

18 Study the characteristics of a BCD to decimal decoder. 

19 To study the functioning of multiplexer and its application for the generation of 
Boolean functions. 

20 To demonstrate the functions performed by decoder using a seven segment LED 
display. 

21 To study the operation of a D/A converter based on a R/2R network 

 



Condensed Matter Physics Laboratory (Course No. PHP6XX0) 

 

S. No. Name of Experiment 

1 Hall effect with temperature 

2  Electrical Conductivity Measurements using four probe resistivity with 
temperature 

3 Vibrational spectroscopy (Raman) 

4 Phonon Dispersion curve 

5 Band gap measurements 

6 Photoluminescence Spectroscopy studies of Materials 

7 Solar cell characterization 

8 Studies on Thermoelectric properties of materials 

9 Thermoelectric Device Characterization 

10 ESR Spectroscopy 

11 Magnetic Susceptibility Measurements 

12 Study of Thermoluminescence of F-centres in Alkali Halide crystals 

 

Optics & Lasers Laboratory (Course No. PHP6XX0) 

 

S. No. Name of the Experiment 

1. To find the wavelength of monochromatic light 

To determine the spacing between the plates of fabry Perot etalon from the fringe 
Pattern  

To find the finesse and free spectral range (FSR) of etalon from the fringe 
calibration at different cavity thickness 

2. To find the refractive index of an unknown solution. 

3. To study the birefringence with respect to applied voltage in an electro optic liquid 

4. Numerical aperture, splice loss and bending loss measurement of multi-mode fiber 
. Numerical aperture and mode field diameter measurement of single mode fiber . 
Calculation of normalized frequency or V-number of single mode fiber . 
Determination of refractive index of transparent solids 



5. To calculate the peak wavelength and spectral bandwidth of LEDs. To analyze 
emission spectrum of laser and study the peak wavelength. 

6. To find out the difference in wavelength of D1 and D2 lines of sodium light. To 
determine the wavelength of monochromatic light 

7. To determine wavelength of laser beam.  

To find refractive index of a transparent material. 

8. To study Gaussian nature of the laser beam. To find diameter (beam spot size) of 
the laser beam. To determine divergence of the laser beam. 

9. Diffraction of light by single slit, double slit, single wire, cross wire and 
transmission grating 

10. Intensity measurement as a function of analyzer angle  

Polarization study by quarter wave plate - elliptical and circular polarization.  
Polarization study by half wave plate - change of polarization axis.  Verification of 
Malus' law 

 

Computational Laboratory (Course No. PHP6XX0) 

 

S. No. Name of Experiment 

1 Implementation of nonlinear root finding techniques 

2  Interpolation techniques 

3 Curve fittings 

4 Solving ordinary differential equations 

5 Simulations of physical systems, Monte Carlo technique etc 

6 Solution of Schrodinger like equation 

7 Solution of Helmohz equation (Propagation study) 

8 Quantum Simulation 

 

  



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Hands-on Experiments 

  



Hands-on Experiments (High end equipments) (PHP6XX0) 

 

S. No. Topic 

1. Amplitude and frequency modulation circuits (Digital Storage Oscilloscope) 

2. Regulated power supplies and their performance evaluation (DSO) 

3. Solar cell construction and characterization (XRD, UV-VIS, SEM, etc.) 

4. Magnetic moment detection (MPMS, PPMS, etc.) 

5. Optoelectronic Properties of Materials (Raman, PPMS) 

6. Construction of coupled prism experimental set up and demonstration of tunneling 
phenomenon 

7. Construction of telescope and observation of stellar objects 

8. Measurement of speed of light using oscillations (DSO , Fast Photodiode) 

9. Life-time of muon (Scintillation detector, Data acquisition and processing system, 
Python coding) 

10. Optical fibre characterization (Laser source, Communication Fibre, Photodetector) 

11. Optical cloaking 

12. Nanomaterials Characterization (XRD, AFM, SEM, PPMS, etc.) 

13. Paschen Curve -Dependence of break-down voltage on the pressure and inter-
electrode gap for a given gas in plasma discharge 

14. Measurement of Plasma parameters by electrostatic probe 

15. Characterization of DC magnetron discharge and estimation of sputtering yield  

16.  Generation and characterization of  non-thermal and non-equilibrium cold plasma 

 

  



Hands-on Experiments (Computational Tools) (PHP6XX0) 

 

S. No. Topic 

1. Ray tracing for design of solar concentrator 

2. Use of COSMOL software for macroscopic multiphysics phenomena 

3. Rsoft software for visualization of optical components and devices 

4. Optifibre for visualization of optical communication through optical fibres 

5. Design of optoelectronic materials using DFT 

6. Molecular dynamics simulation using LAMMPS and GROMACS 

7. Simulation of magnetic domains using Micromagnetics 

8. Gamma ray burst (GRB) data analysis from the Fermi-GBM space telescope. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Title General Theory of Relativity Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective  

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. give the student a basic understanding of the General Theory of Relativity and its 
importance for modern physics.  

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. have detailed insight regarding theory and dynamics related to gravity. 
2. be able to apply the theory of general relativity in many fields of physics for example in 

astrophysics and cosmology. 
 

Contents  

Preliminary discussions: Review of special theory of relativity, vector and tensor, particle 
dynamics, electrodynamics, energy momentum tensor, relativistic hydrodynamics. 

Principle of equivalence:  Statement of the principle,gravitational forces, geodesic–affine 
connection, Newtonian limit. (8 Lectures) 

Tensor analysis: Tensor algebra, tensor density, transformation of affine connection, 
covariant differentiation, gradient, divergence, curl, parallel transport. (8 Lectures) 

Curvature: curvature tensor, Bianchi identity, Ricci tensor, curvature scalar, Killing vectors 
and symmetries. (5 Lectures) 

Einstein's field equation: Derivation of field equation, Schwarzschild solution, Birkhoff's 
theorem, geodesic equation in Schwarzschild space time, Precession of perihelion of 
mercury, bending of light rays, gravitational red shift. (8 Lectures) 

Stellar equilibrium and collapse: Differential equation for stellar structure, White dwarfs, 
neutron stars, comoving coordinates, Schwarzschild blackholes, collapse to a blackholes.  

Gravitational radiation: (10 Lectures) 

Universe: Friedmann-Robertson-Walker solution, our Universe. (3 Lectures) 

Textbook  

1. Weinberg, S., Gravitation and Cosmology: Principle and Applications of the General Theory 
of Relativity, 1st Ed.,  John Willey & Sons 1972. 

2.  Hartle, J. B., Gravity, 1st Ed. , Pearson education 2011. 

3.  Misner, C.W., Thorne, K. S. and Wheeler, J. A., Gravitation, Princeton University Press 2017 

 

Self Learning Material  

1. Schutz, B., General Relativity, Cambridge University Press 2011 



2. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hbmf0bB38h0&list=PLGI_2C39f-
V1AACba_7pZP8A9M7PmQJqx 

3. Bertschinger, E. W., General Relativity, http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/36859. 
Preparatory Course Material  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  



Title Relativistic Quantum Mechanics Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective  

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. To obtain an understanding of the key concepts of relativistic quantum mechanics. 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understand Klein Gordon and Dirac equations, their significance and transformation 
properties.  

2. Understand various applications of relativistic wave equations.  

Contents  

Klein Gordon Equation: KG equation, The non relativistic limit, Free spin-0 particles, The 
charged KG field, Lagrange density and energy-momentum tensor of the KG-field, Lorentz 
Invariance of the KG equation, Charge conjugation and C Parity, Interaction of a spin-0 particle 
with an electromagnetic field, Gauge invariance of the couplings, Lagrange density and energy-
momentum tensor for a KG particle in an electromagnetic field, Solution of KG equation for a 
square-well, exponential and scalar 1/r potential, Basics of Photonics atoms.  (14 Lectures) 

Dirac Equation: Negative Energy Solutions, Antiparticles, Dirac Hole Theory, Feynman 
interpretation of Antiparticles, Gamma-matrices and their properties, Lagrange density and 
energy-momentum tensor of the free Dirac equation, Covariance of Dirac equation, Pauli‟s 
fundamental theorem, Spinors under Lorentz transformations, Bilinear covariants, Charge 
conjugation, Parity & Time reversal invariance. (14 Lectures) 

Applications of Dirac Equations: Majorana representation of Dirac equation, Two component 
theory of neutrino, Spin and Helicity, Dirac particle in one-dimensional square well potential, 
Solution of Dirac equation in a Coulomb and scalar potential, Relativistic Hydrogen atom 
problem, Klein‟s paradox (14 Lectures) 

Textbook  

1. Bjorken, J.D. and Drell, S.D., Relativistic Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-Hill, New York 1998. 

2.Sakurai,J.J., Advanced Quantum Mechanics, Addison-Wesley, 1967. 

3. Greiner, W., Relativistic Quantum Mechanics, Springer, 2000. 

 

 

 

Self Learning Material  



1. Guth, A., Relativistic Quantum Field Theory - I,  http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/53412 
 

Preparatory Course Material  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  



Title Particle Physics Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective  

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide background to understand the concepts of modern particle physics. 

 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understand details of Quantum Electrodynamics, Quantum Chromodynamics and Weak 
interactions. 

2. Grasp concepts of Standard Model of particle physics and its limitations. 

 

Contents  

 

A preview of Particle Physics: Elementary particle dynamics, Quark structure of Hadrons, 
Decay rates and cross sections (4 Lectures).  

 

Quantum Electrodynamics (QED): Elementary QED processes, Anomalous magnetic 
moment, Extracting the moment and evaluating the graphs, Electron self-energy, Pole 
mass, Minimal Subtraction, Counter terms, Two and three point functions, Infrared 
divergences, Jets, Renormalizability of QED. (12 Lectures) 

 

Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD): Feynman rules for QCD, Elastic and inelastic electron-
proton scattering, The Rosenbluth formula, Parton distribution functions, Callan-Gross 
relation, Dokshitzer-Gribov-Lipatov-Altarelli-Parisi (DGLAP) splitting function, Factorization 
and the parton model,  The operator product expansion (14 Lectures) 

 

Weak and Electroweak Interactions:  The weak charged current interactions, V-A and chiral 
structure of weak interaction, Lepton universality, Charged and neutral  current neutrino 
scattering, Electroweak Unification, The Higgs mechanism, Discovery of Higgs Boson, Need 
for physics beyond the standard model. (12 Lectures) 

 

 

 



Textbook 

1. Schwartz, M. D., Quantum Field Theory and the Standard Model, Cambridge University 
Press, 2014. 

2. Thomson, M., Modern Particle Physics, Cambridge University Press, 2016. 
 

 

Self Learning Material  

1.  Susskind, L., New Revolutions in Particle Physics: Basic Concepts, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2eFvVzNF24g&list=PL768E1383EA79C603 

 

Preparatory Course Material  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  



Title Quantum Field Theory Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective  

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide background to understand basic concepts of quantization of scalar, spinor and 
gauge fields. 

 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understand interrelations between quantum fields, symmetry and conservation laws. 

2. Apply the techniques of Feynman rules and diagrams to various elementary scattering pro  

 

Contents  

Classical field theory: Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formalisms; Occupation number 
representation, Noether's theorem, Continuous and discrete symmetries (4 lectures). 

 

Canonical Quantization: General Formulation, Normal ordering, Mode expansion, Quantization 
of real and complex scalar fields, Commutation relations, Quantization of Dirac fields, Anti-
Commutators, Quantization of massless gauge fields in radiation and Lorentz gauge, 
Quantization of massive vector fields (14 lectures).   

 

Interacting field theory: Propagators and Green‟s functions, The S-matrix, Perturbation 
expansion of the S-matrix, Wick's Theorem, Feynman Rules and Feynman diagrams for 
interacting scalar field theory and spinor electrodynamics, Lowest Order Cross-Section for 
Rutherford and Mott scattering (16 lectures).  

 

Radiative Corrections and Renormalization: Casimir effect, Vacuum polarization, Electron 
magnetic moment, Lamb‟s shift, Mass renormalization (8 lectures) 

Textbook  

1. Peskin, M. E. and Schroeder, D. V., An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory, Frontiers in 
Physics, 1995.  

2. Weinberg, S., The Quantum Theory of Fields I, Cambridge University Press, 2008.  



Self Learning Material  

1. Tripathy, P. K., Quantum Field Theory, IIT Madras,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115106065/ 

2. Tong D., Lectures on Quantum Field Theory, University of Cambridge, 
http://www.damtp.cam.ac.uk/user/tong/qft.html 

 

Preparatory Course Material  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Title  Photonics Number PHL7XX0 



Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Pre-requisite  To effect from  

 

Objective  

To understand the fundamental aspects of light wave, its propagation and interaction with the 
medium 

 

Learning Outcomes 

1. The students will become familiar with the interesting concepts of photonics and principles of 
polarizers, modulators, waveguides, resonators, lasers and holograms etc. 

2. The course will provide a roadmap to develop specialized knowledge in the field of photonics 

 

Course Content 

 

Wave propagation in dielectric- group velocityand dispersion, pulse spreading, plane wave and 
Helmholtz equation, Gaussian and Bessel beams 

Polarization states and representation- Jones vector, Stokes parameters for polarized and 
unpolarized light, Poincare sphere, Coherence- linewidth, spatial coherence, interferometers 

Light propagation in anisotropic media- electro-optic modulation, acousto-optic interaction, 
modulators 

Fourier optics- free space light propagation, optical Fourier transform, concept of image formation 
and holography, introduction to diffraction    

Photonic crystals and waveguides- periodic media and Bloch waves, concept of photonic bandgap, 
1D, 2D and 3D crystals, dispersion relation, wave-guidance, applications 

Optical Resonators- mode and mode density, losses and spectral width, quality factor, Fabry-Perot 
etalon, optical spectrum analyzers, mode stability, ring resonators, micro-resonators  

Lasers- light amplification, threshold condition, rate equation, three and four level laser systems, 
transverse and longitudinal mode selection, Q-switching, mode-locking, Applications of lasers   

Nonlinear Optics- physical origin of nonlinear polarization, second order nonlinear phenomena,Kerr 
effect, stimulated Raman scattering, stimulated Brillouin scattering, four-wave mixing  

 

 Textbooks 

1. Yariv, A., and Yeh, P., Photonics, Oxford University Press, 2007. 
2. Saleh, B. E. A., and Teich, M. C., Fundamentals of Photonics, John Wiley & Sons, 2007. 

 Reference Books 



    Ghatak, A. K., and Thyagarajan, K., Optical Electronics, Cambridge University Press, 2002. 

Online Course Material 

   Srinivasan, B., Introduction to Photonics, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc19_ee20/preview 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  



Title Astrophysics Number PHL7XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective  

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Familiarize the basic ideas needed to understand astrophysical phenomena.  
2. Elucidate the nature and properties of compact astrophysical objects. 
Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. have idea how astrophysical observations, measurements can be carried out and how the 
observational data can be interpreted. 

2. be acquainted with the physics of compact objects. 
 

Contents  

Properties of Sun: Estimate of surface temperature, luminosity, radius, mass, sun's 
spectrum, composition of sun.  (2 Lectures) 

Fundamental of radiative transfer: Radiative flux, the specific intensity, radiative transfer, 
optical depth, plane parallel atmosphere, the grey atmosphere problem, formation of 
spectral line, opacity, calculation of opacity.  (8 Lectures) 

Properties of stars: Colour and surface temperature, stellar spectra, spectroscopy parallax. 
the Hertzsprung-Russel diagram, size, mass and temperature of stars.  (6 Lectures) 

Stellar formation and evolution: Hydrostatic equilibrium, virial theorem, Jeans' crieria for star 
formation, brown dwarf, stellar structure equations.  (7 Lectures) 

Nucleosynthesis inside stars: Possibility of nuclear reactions in stars, Nuclear reaction rates, 
important nuclear reactions in stars, evolution of stars with different masses.  (4 Lectures) 

White dwarfs: - equation of state for degenerate gas, polytropic EoS, Lane-Emden equation, 
Chandrasekhar mass limit. (6 Lectures) 

Neutron stars: Supernova, neutron star, neutron drip, TOV equation, pulsars, magnetic 
dipole model of pulsars, nonvacuum pulsar model, glitch, cooling of neutron stars, neutron 
stars in binary. (6 Lectures) 

Galaxies: Stellar dynamics, Interstellar medium. (3 Lectures) 

 

Textbook  

1. Rai Choudhari A., Astrophysics for physicists, 1st Ed., Cambridge University Press 2010. 
2. Morison I., Introduction to astronomy and cosmology, 1st Ed., Willey and Sons ltd 2008. 
3. Shapiro, S. L., Teukolsky, S. A., Black Holes, White Dwarfs, and Neutron Stars, 1st ed., 

WILLEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, 2004.  



Self Learning Material  

1. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dpRqK_awV9Y&list=PLy5Ast_vPItFNkraErbQ8AmWEaQ
Mt34Rx 

2. https://www.edx.org/course/introduction-astrophysics-epflx-phys-209-enx 
3. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nzmFc2gjUo4&list=PLE17CC91B39224675 
Preparatory Course Material  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  



Title Physics of neutrinos Number PHL8XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective  

Prerequisite Particle Physics   

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide background to understand the role of neutrinos in probing fundamental 
interactions of nature. 

 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Grasp the theoretical concepts of neutrino oscillations and various neutrino mass models. 

2. Understand details of various currently running and upcoming experimental facilities. 

3.  Understand the role of neutrinos in the early universe.  

 

Contents  

 

Neutrino oscillations: Solar and atmospheric neutrino puzzles, Neutrino oscillations in vacuum, 
plane wave & wave packet treatment, Neutrino oscillations in constant matter density, MSW 
resonance, Neutrinos through varying matter density, Terrestrial neutrino oscillation 
experiments, Supernova neutrinos. Synchronized & Bipolar oscillations, Spectral split.   (10 
Lectures) 

 

Sterile Neutrinos: LSND anomaly, More neutrino species, MiniBoone experiment, New 
anomalies - Reactor neutrino anomaly and Gallium experiments calibration anomaly, Proposed 
future experiments, Sterile neutrinos in astrophysics and cosmology.  (10 Lectures) 

 

Neutrino Nature and Mass: Absolute mass experiments, Dirac and Majorana masses for 
neutrinos, Neutrinoless double beta decay, Neutrino mass models, Seesaw mechanism, Type I, 
II and III Seesaw models, Zee model, Left-right symmetric model, GUT-based models, 
Supersymmetric models.  (10 Lectures) 

 

Neutrino Cosmology: Robertson–Walker metric, Dynamics of expansion, The cosmic neutrino 
background, Neutrino temperature, Energy density of light massive neutrinos, Energy density 
of heavy neutrinos, Neutrinos as dark matter.  (8 Lectures) 



 

Ultra-high energy Neutrinos: Neutrinos from Astrophysical objects: AGNs, GRBs, GZK 
neutrinos, Neutrino Astronomy.  (4 Lectures) 

 

Textbook 

1.Giunti, C., & Kim, C. W., Fundamentals of Neutrino Physics and Astrophysics, Oxford 
University Press 2007. 

2. Kim, C. W., & Pevsner, A., Neutrinos in physics and astrophysics, Harwood Academic 
1993. 

 

Reference Books  

1. Fukugita, M., & Yanagida, T., Physics of Neutrinos, Springer Verlag 2003. 

2.Boehm,‎ F., & Vogel, P., Physics of Massive Neutrinos, Cambridge University Press 1992. 

 

Self Learning Material  

1. Dighe, A., Neutrino Physics, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research Mumbai, 
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL28B95E11276C75F6 

Preparatory Course Material  

 

 

 

 

 

  



 

Title Gauge theory of weak interactions Number PHL8XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective  

Prerequisite Particle Physics   

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide background to understand basic concepts of non-abelian global and local gauge 
symmetries. 

 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Grasp the theoretical concepts of spontaneously broken symmetry, both global and local. 

2. Understand details of Glashow-Salam-Weinberg gauge theory of electroweak 
interactions. 

 

Contents  

Global non-Ablelian symmetries: Flavor symmetries        and       , Non-Abelian global 

symmetries in Lagrangian quantum field theories, chiral symmetry. (4 Lectures) 

 

 Local  non-Ablelian symmetries:  Local SU(2) symmetry: the covariant derivative, Geometrical 
curvature and the gauge field strength tensor, Local SU(3) symmetry, Local SU(2) and SU(3) 
Lagrangians, Quantizing non-Abelian gauge fields: Interaction of non-Abelian gauge bosons, 
The Faddeev-Popov Lagrangian, Ghosts and Unitarity, Becchi-Rouet-Stora-Tyutin (BRST) 
symmetry, One loop divergences of non-Abelian gauge theory,   function.  (8 Lectures) 

 

Spontaneous symmetry breaking: The Fabri-Picasso theorem, Spontaneously broken symmetry 
in condensed matter physics: The ferromagnet and The Bogoliubov superfluid, Goldstone‟s 
theorem, Spontaneously broken global U(1) symmetry: the Goldstone model, Spontaneously 
broken global non-Abelian symmetry, Chiral Symmetry Breaking: The Nambu analogy, Two 
flavour QCD and        X        ,  Pion decay and the Goldberger-Treiman relation, The linear 

and nonliear σ -models, Chiral anomalies; Massive and massless vector particles, The 
generation of „photon mass‟ in a superconductor, Spontaneously broken local U(1) symmetry: 
the Abelian Higgs model, ‟t Hooft‟s gauges, Spontaneously broken local SU(2) X U(1) 
symmetry. (15 Lectures) 

 

Electroweak Unification: Violation of unitarity in the current–current model, The Intermediate 
vector Boson (IVB) model, Violation of unitarity bounds in the IVB model, The problem of non-
renormalizability in weak interactions, Glashow-Salam-Weinberg theory of Electroweak 



Interactions: Weak isospin and hypercharge, The SU(2) X U(1) group of the electroweak 
interactions, quantum number assignments and W and Z masses, The leptonic currents and 
massless neutrinos, The quark currents, simple tree-level predictions, Anomaly cancellations, 
The discovery of the    and    at the CERN     collider, The fermion mass problem, Quark  and 

neutrino flavour mixing, Higher-order corrections, The top quark, The Higgs sector, Theoretical 
considerations concerning Higgs mass, Higgs phenomenology, Discovery of Higgs Bosons. (15 
Lectures) 

Textbook 

1. Aitchison, I. J. R. & Hey, A. J. G., Gauge Theories in Particle Physics, Volume II: A Practical 
Introduction : Non-Abelian Gauge Theories : QCD and the Electoweak Theory, Taylor & 
Francis, 2003.  

2. Cheng, T. P. & Li, L. F., Gauge theory of elementary particle physics, Oxford University 
Press, 2000. 

Self Learning Material  

1. Langacker, P., The Standard Model, Institute of Advanced Study Princeton, 
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLNhSjK9aGXjq22HAdhjMdJM3Ig4KdLayP 

Preparatory Course Material  

1. Peskin, M. E. & Schroeder, D. V., An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory, Addison-Wesley 
Pub. Co, 1995. 

 

 

  



 

Title Dark Energy Number PHL8XX0 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective  

Prerequisite General Theory of Relativity   

 

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide background to understand concepts related to Dark Energy which is thought to 
comprise 68% of the known universe. 

2.  Provide background to develop insight of theoretical models of Dark Energy. 

 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Grasp concepts of various matter and gravity modified models of Dark Energy. 

2. Understand details of a number of experimental methods to probe Dark Energy.  

 

Contents  

 

Theoretical Framework: Friedmann equations, equation of state of dark energy, Correlation 
function and power spectrum, Cosmological perturbation theory, The Newtonian gauge, Single-
fluid model, Scales larger than the horizon, Scales smaller than the Hubble radius, Two-fluid 
solutions, The matter power spectrum, Perturbed photon propagation. (10 Lectures) 

 

Cosmological Constant: The fine tuning problem, The coincidence problem, Supersymmetric 
models, Cosmological constant and the anthropic principle, The decoupling of the cosmological 
constant from gravity. (4 Lectures) 

 

Modified Matter Models of Dark Energy:  Quintessence, Quintessence potentials in particle 
physics, Reconstruction of quintessence from observations, k-essence, Phantoms, Coupled dark 
energy, Chameleon scalar fields, Dark energy models with scaling solutions, Unified models of 
dark energy and dark matter. (8 Lectures) 

 

Modified gravity Models of Dark Energy: f (R) gravity, Gauss–Bonnet dark energy models, 
Scalar-tensor theories, Dvali, Gabadadze and Porrati (DGP) braneworld model. (4 Lectures) 



 

Cosmic Acceleration without Dark Energy: Lemaître–Tolman–Bondi (LTB)  models, Backreaction 
of Cosmological Perturbations. (4 Lectures) 

 

Observational Methods: Type Ia Supernovae as Dark Energy Probe, Baryon Acoustic Oscillations 
(BAO) as Standard Ruler, The Alcock–Paczynski Test, Weak Gravitational Lensing, Weak 
Lensing Observational Results, Cluster Abundance as a Dark Energy Probe, X-Ray Gas Mass 
Fraction as a Dark Energy Probe, Gamma Ray Bursts and Radio Galaxies as Cosmological 
Probe.(12 Lectures) 

 

Textbook 

1.Amendola, L. &  Tsujikawa, S., (2010), Dark Energy: Theory and Observations, 
Cambridge University Press. 

2. Wang, Y., (2010),  Dark Energy, Wiley-VCH. 

3.  Dodelson, (2000), Modern Cosmology, Elsevier. 

 

Self Learning Material  

1.Turner, M., The Dark Side of the Universe: Dark Matter and Dark Energy, Department of 
Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Chicago,  
http://videolectures.net/cernacademictraining2010_turner_dark/ 

 

 

 

 



 

Indian Institute of Technology 
Jodhpur 

 

   

 

 

 

 

PG Course Booklet 

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

July 2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
1 

 



 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Master of Science (MSc) Program  
in  

Mathematics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2 
 



 
(1) Introduction: 

The classical mathematics provides foundations for analysis of key principles behind 

modern and emergent technologies, modern mathematics coupled with computational 

capabilities is opening new avenues for further explorations. M.Sc. (Mathematics) 

Program at IIT Jodhpur aims at tapping these opportunities by developing workforce 

specialized in mathematics needed for developing key technologies. The proposed four 

semester program strives to provide balance between analysis and application of 

Mathematics. The compulsory courses provide the basic understanding and foundation of 

mathematics enhancing analytic capabilities of the students. Students can further 

explore their area of interest with program and open elective courses. The project 

component spread over last two semesters provides research exposure to the students 

and provides an opportunity to apply their mathematical skills to solve real-life 

problems. Students are encouraged to undertake research Summer Internships in 

Institute of repute, Industry and R&D organizations. 

 

(2) Objectives of the Program: 

M.Sc. program in Mathematics at IIT Jodhpur is offered with the objective of tapping 

opportunities for nurturing motivated students in the frontline areas and well trained 

workforce for Academia and Industry. The Program also strives to provide a vibrant 

environment to support independent thinking and developing the spirit of team work. 

 
(3) Expected Graduate Attributes: 

(1) Skill set to analyze abstract mathematical structures. 

(2) Understanding about the recent areas in pure and applied mathematics such as 

algebra, analysis, statistics and computation. 

(3) Ability to formulate mathematics from computational aspect.  

(4) Knowledge and capability to develop and apply mathematical models for real life 

problems. 

(5) Skill set to understand the abstraction of mathematical structures. 

(6) Analytical and scientific skill set to pursue higher studies and research in diverse 

areas of mathematics. 

(7) Ability to express ideas in the written and oral formats. 

 

(4) Learning Outcomes: 

(1) Understanding of fundamental aspects of real, complex and functional analysis. 

(2) Basic understanding of linear and abstract algebra. 

(3) Knowledge about basics and use of probability theory, statistics and differential 

equations. 

(4) Skill set to cater computational aspects using programming techniques. 

(5) Basic understanding of symbolic solution tools such as MATLAB or Mathematica. 

(6) Demonstrate skills to communicate scientific ideas and/or application systems.  

3 
 



(7) Acquire project management skills. 

(5) Program Structure: 
 

Cat. Course Course Title L-T-P-Credits Cat. Course Course Title L-T-P- Credits 
Number D Number D 

Semester 1  Semester 2 
C MAL6XX0 Linear 3-0-0- 4  C MAL6XX0 Abstract 3-0-0-1 4 

algebra 1 Algebra 
C MAL6XX0 Real analysis 3-0-0- 4  C MAL5XX0 Complex  3-0-0-1 4 

1 Analysis 
C MAL6XX0 Ordinary 3-0-0- 4  C MAL6XX0 Partial 3-0-0-0 3 

Differential 1 Differential 
equations equations 

C MAL5XX0 Probability 3-0-0- 4  C MAL6XX0 Functional 3-0-0-0 3 
and 1 analysis 
Statistics 

C MAL5XX0 Programming 2-0-2- 3  PE Xxxxx PE1 3-0-0-0 3 
Techniques 0 

      C MA5XX0 Data 1-0-2-0 2 
Structures and 
Algorithms 

Total 19  Total 19 
 

Semester 3  Semester 4 
C MAL6XX0 Topology 3-0-0- 3  PE Xxxxx PE5 3-0-0-0 3 

0 
PE Xxxxx PE2 3-0-0- 3  PE Xxxxx PE6 3-0-0-0 3 

0 
PE Xxxxx PE3 3-0-0- 3  OE Xxxxx OE2 3-0-0-0 3 

0 
PE Xxxxx PE4 3-0-0- 3       

0 
OE Xxxxx OE1 3-0-0- 3       

0 
P MAP7XX0  Project 0-0-0- 5  P MAP7XX0  Project 0-0- 10 

5 0-10 
Total 20  Total 19 

Grand total 77 
 

S.No. Category Course Total Total 
Category Title Courses Credits 

1 C Compulsory 11 38 
2 PE Program Electives 6 18 
3 OE Open Elective 2 6 
4 P Project 2 15 

Total  77 
 
 
 

(6) Topic Cloud 

Compulsory Topics: 

(a) Linear Algebra (Finite dimensional Vector Spaces, linear transformations, Inner 

Product Spaces, Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors, Jordan canonical forms, Matrix 

theory, Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors, Spectral Analysis) 

4 
 



(b) Real Analysis (Basic properties of real system, study of Metric spaces, Calculus of 

several variables, Function spaces), Abstract Algebra (Basic algebraic structures, 

group theory, ring theory, Galois Theory) 

(c) Topology (Topological structures and their properties, transformation between 

topological spaces), Functional Analysis (Normed linear spaces, Banach spaces, Lp 

Spaces, Hilbert Spaces, Linear transformations and their properties) 

(d) Complex Analysis (Fundamental theorem of Complex Analysis, Residue theorem, 

Contour integration and its applications, evaluation of Improper integrals, conformal 

mappings) 

(e) Probability theory (Univariate and multi-variate Probability Distributions and their 

properties, weak laws of large numbers, central limit theorem). 

(f) Statistics (sampling distributions, estimation of parameters, interval estimation, 

testing of hypotheses), Statistical modelling (Estimation of parameters, Interval 

estimation, Testing of hypotheses) 

(g) Ordinary Differential Equations (Existence and Uniqueness of solution, Sturm-

Liouville problems and properties of its solutions) 

(h) Partial differential equations and their applications 

(i) Fundamentals of Programming 

(j) Numerical Techniques (Root finding methods, Solution for system of linear 

equations, Power method), Solution to System of linear Equations, Interpolation, 

Numerical solution of Ordinary Differential Equations. 
 

Elective Topics: 

Fourier analysis, Wavelets analysis, Dynamical Systems, Operations Research, Number 
Theory, Calculus of Variations, Integral Equations, Statistical Inference, Graphs Theory, 
Stochastic Calculus, Measure and Integration, Chaos Theory, Numerical Methods for 
Partial Differential Equations, Discrete Mathematics. 
 

 
 

(7) List of Electives 
 

(a) Department of Mathematics 
 MAL7XX0: Measure and Integration 
 MAL7XX0: Financial Engineering 
 MAL7XX0: Wavelets analysis and Applications   
 MAL7XX0: Dynamical Systems 
 MAL7XX0: Optimization 
 MAL7XX0: Numerical Analysis 
 MAL7XX0: Number Theory 
 MAL7XX0: Statistical Inference 
 MAL7XX0: Graph Theory 
 MAL7XX0: Calculus of Variation and Integral Equations 
 MAL7XX0: Stochastic Calculus  
 MAL7XX0: Algebraic Number Theory 
 MAL7XX0: Machine Learning and Pattern Recognition 
 MAL7XX0: Chaos Theory and its Applications 
 MAL7XX0: Representations of finite groups 
 MAL8XX0: Numerical Partial Differential Equations 
 MAL7XX0: Selected Topics in Mathematics - I (1-0-0-0) 
 MAL7XX0: Selected Topics in Mathematics - II (2-0-0-0) 
 MAL7XX0: Selected Topics in Mathematics - III (3-0-0-0) 

5 
 



 
(b) From sister Departments 

 Theory of Vibrations 
 Finite Element Methods in Engineering 
 Incompressible Fluid Flow 
 Computer Graphics 
 Advanced Computer Graphics 
 Digital Image Analysis 
 Statistical Signal Analysis 
 Statistical Decision Theory 
 Computational Imaging 
 Multimedia Communication 
 Classical Mechanics 
 Quantum Mechanics 
 Statistical Physics 
 Introduction to Quantum Technologies 

  

6 
 



(8) Content of compulsory courses: 

 
Course Title Linear Algebra Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest. 

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Concept of linear spaces, mapping between spaces, norm and their action on 
spaces. 

2. Eigenvalues, eigenvectors and diagonalization, and Primary decomposition 
theorem. 

3. Normal operators and Spectral theory of real symmetric normal operators. 
 
Contents 
Vector Spaces, Matrices and System of Linear Equations [10 Lectures]: System of 
linear equations,Matrices and rank, Vector Spaces over fields, Subspaces, Bases and 
dimension, Direct sum of the sub spaces. 
 
Linear Transformation and Inner Product Spaces [10 Lectures]: Linear 
Transformations, Rank and Nullity theorem, Representation of linear transformations 
by matrices, duality and transpose. Inner product spaces, Gram-Schmidt 
orthonormalization, orthogonal projections. 
 
Operators and Spectral Theorem [20 Lectures]:Linear functionals and adjoints, 
Hermitian, self-adjoint, Unitary and normal operators, Spectral theorem for real 
operators, Eigenvalues, Eigenvectors, Characteristic polynomials, minimal polynomials, 
Cayley Hamilton Theorem, triangulation, diagonalization, Jordan canonical forms 
(without proof). 

 
Textbook  

1. Hoffman, K., and Kunze R., Linear Algebra,  Pearson Education (India) 2003. 
2. Herstein, I.N., Topics in Algebra, 2nd Edn., John Wiley and Sons. 
3. Lax, P., Linear Algebra and its applications, John Wiley & Sons, Indian Edition 1997 
4. Lang, S., Linear Algebra, 3rd Edition, Springer, 2004. 

 
Reference Books  

1. Artin, M., Algebra, Prentice Hall of India, 1994. 
2. Axler, S., (1997), Linear Algebra Done Right. 
3. Kumaresan, S., (2000) Linear Algebra – A Geometric Approach, PHI Learning. 
4. Sharma, R. K., Shah, S. K. and Shankar, A. G., Algebra I: A Basic Course in 

Algebra, Pearson Education, 2011. 
 
Online course Material  

1. Rana, I.K., Basic Linear Algebra, NPTEL Course material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Bombay,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111101115/ 

 
 
 
 
 

7 
 



Course Title Real Analysis Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. To train the student in the area of real analysis 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for 

further applications in their respective domains of interest 
 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Metric spaces, completeness and Baire Category. 
2. Continuity, Uniform continuity, Contraction mapping, fixed point theorem.  
3. Connectedness and Compactness and Heine-Borel theorem. 
4. Function spaces, Weiestrass approximation theorem. 

 
Contents 
Real Number System, Limits and Continuity [10 Lectures]:  Countable and uncountable 
sets, the axiom of choice, Zorn’s lemma, Real number system, Consequences of 
completeness property, limit and continuity of functions, uniform continuity.   

Metric Spaces [10 Lectures]: Metric spaces, continuous and uniformly continuous 
functions, bounded and totally bounded sets, Compactness, Heine-Borel Theorem, 
Completeness, Cantor’s Intersection theorem, Baire spaces, Connectedness.  

Sequences and Series of Functions: [10 Lectures]Sequences and Series of functions, 
Uniform convergence, Uniform convergence and integration, Uniform convergence and 
differentiation,  

Multivariable Calculus [10 Lectures]: Functions of several variables, continuity, 
differentiability, partial derivatives, Jacobian, Inverse Function Theorem and the Implicit 
Function Theorem, multivariable integration, Fubini’s theorem, Change of variables, Line 
integrals, surface integrals, Green’s theorem, Divergence theorem, Stokes theorem, and 
applications. 
 

Textbook 
1. Aliprantis, C.D., and Burkinshaw, O., Principles of Real Analysis, 3rd Edition. 
2. Apostol, T., Mathematical Analysis, 2nd Edition, Narosa, 2002. 
3. Ghorpade, S.R., and Limaye, B.V., A Course in Multivariable Calculus and Analysis, 

Springer. 
 

Reference Books 
1. Royden, H. L., Real Analysis, Third Edition, Macmillan Publishing Company, 1988. 
2. Rudin, W., Priciples of Mathematical Analysis, Third Edition, McGraw-Hill, 1976. 
3. Davidson, K. R., and Donsig, A. P., Real analysis and applications: Theory in 

practice, Springer Publications, 2010. 
4. Bartle, R., Sherbert, D., Introduction to Real Analysis, 3rd Edition, Wiley 2011. 

 
Online course Material  

1. Kulkarni, S.H., Real Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, 
IIT Madras,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106053/ 
 

 
 
 
 

8 
 



Course Title Ordinary Differential Equations Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. Introduce the concepts of existence and uniqueness of solution of ordinary 
differential equations 

2. Develop analytical techniques to solve ordinary differential equations 
3. Understand the properties of solution of ordinary differential equations 

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Understanding existence, uniqueness, and other properties of a solution of 
ordinary differential equations 

2. Solving ordinary differential equations with series method, Green's function 
method 

3. Solving systems of ODEs, and characterization of their solutions 
 
Contents 

Motivations and origins, Existence-Uniqueness [7 Lectures]: Existence of solutions by 
Picard’s method, uniqueness and continuous dependence w.r.t. initial conditions and 
parameters, continuation of solutions, existence  and uniqueness of solutions to 
system of differential equations. 
 
Second Order Linear Equations [23 Lectures]: General solution of differential 
equations using method of undetermined coefficients, method of variation of 
parameters, variable coefficients equations, Power series solution method, Legendre’s 
equation, Frobenius method, Bessel’s equation, Green's function method, Sturm-
Liouville problems, orthogonal eigen-function expansions, Sturm comparison theorem, 
Sturm separation theorem, 
 
Systems of Differential Equations [10 Lectures]: Phase plane method, critical points of 
the system and their stability analysis, algebraic properties of solutions, the 
eigenvalue-eigenvector method of finding solutions, fundamental matrix solutions, 
matrix exponential, nonhomogeneous equations. 

 
Text Books 

1. Ross, S. L., Introduction to ordinary differential equations, 4th Ed., John Wiley 
Publications, 1989 

2. Braun. M., Differential Equations and Their Applications, 3rd  Ed., Springer-Verlag, 
1983 

3. Chicone, C., Ordinary Differential Equations with Applications, 2nd  Ed., Springer, 
2006 

 
Reference Books 

1. Coddington, E. A., An Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations, PHI 
Learning 1999 

2. Birkhoff, G. and Rota G., Ordinary Differential Equations, 4th Ed., Wiley 
Publications, 1989 

3. Simmons, G., Differential Equations with Applications and Historical Notes, 2nd 
Ed., McGraw Hill Education, 2017 

 
Online Course Material 

1. Agrawal, P. N. and Pandey, D. N., Ordinary and partial differential equations and 
applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IITRoorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107111/ 

9 
 



2. Raghavendra V., Ordinary differential equations, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Mathematics, IIT Kanpur,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111104031/ 

 
 
 
  

10 
 



Course Title Probability and Statistics Course No. MAL5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. Demonstrate an understanding of the basic principles of probability theory. 
2. Use of the properties of discrete and continuous random variables with their 

joint, marginal, and conditional distributions. 
3. Use of the various families of probability distributions to model various types of 

data. 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Understanding of probability theory and statistics to solve industrial problems. 
2. Understanding of random sampling, theory of estimation and testing of 

hypotheses. 
 
Contents: 

Probability spaces and Random Variables[15 lectures]: Probability measure, 
conditional probability, Bayes’ theorem, Random variable, cumulative distribution 
function and its properties, probability density function, functions of a random 
variable, standard discrete and continuous distributions and their applications, 
Transformation, moments, Chebychev’s inequality. 

Joint Distributions[10 lectures]: Random vectors, joint, marginal and conditional 
distributions, conditional expectation, independence, correlation and regression, Bi-
variate normal distribution, functions of random vectors, transformation. 

Limit Theorems[3 lectures]: Convergence of sequences of random variables, weak and 
strong laws of large numbers, central limit theorems. 

Estimation and Tests of Hypotheses[14 lectures]: Sampling distributions, estimation of 
parameters, maximum likelihood method and method of moments, interval estimation, 
testing of hypotheses. 

 
Text Books 

1. Rohatgi, V. K., and Saleh, A. K. M. E., An Introduction to Probability and 
Statistics, Second Edition, Wiley India, 2000. 

2. Casella, G. and Berger, R. (2002). Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning. 
3. Hoel, P.G., Port, S.C. and Stone, C.J. (1971). Introduction to Probability Theory, 

Houghton Mifflin Series in Statistics. 
 

Reference Books 
1. Hogg, R. V., McKean J. W., and Craig A., Introduction to Mathematical Statistics, 

Sixth Edition, Pearson Education India, 2006. 
2. Prakasa Rao, B. L., S., A First Course in Probability and Statistics, World 

Scientific/Cambridge University Press India, 2009. 
3. Castaneda, L. B., Arunachalam, V., and Dharmaraja, S., Introduction to 

probability and stochastic processes with Applications. Wiley, 2012 
 

Online Course Material: 
1. Kumar, S., Probability and Statistics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 

Mathematics, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105090/ 
 
 
 
 

11 
 



Title Programing techniques Number MAL5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 2–0–2-0 

[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  

The Instructor will: 
1. introduce the basics of computer programming in C/C++. 
2. Teach to develop well-structured programs in C/C++. 
 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Write well structures programs in C/C++. 
2. Implement and solve algebraic and transcendental equations and system of 

equations numerically. 
Contents  

 
 
  

Introduction[2 Lectures]:machine language, assembly language, high-level programming 
languages, compiler, interpreter, loader, linker, and flowchart. 
 
Basic features of programming (Using C/C++) [8 Lectures]:Data types, variables, 
operators, expressions, control structures, functions, parameter passing conventions. 
 
Advanced features of programming [8 Lectures]: Pointers, arrays, operations on data 
(Insert, delete, search, traverse and modify), structures, introduction to classes. 
 
Root finding methods [4 Lectures]: Bisection method, Secant method, the method of 
false position, Newton-Raphson method. 
 
Solution of system of linear equations [6 Lectures]: Gauss elimination, Gauss-Jordan 
method, LU decomposition, Crout's Method, Do-little Method, and Cholesky 
decomposition. 

 
Textbooks  

1. Balaguruswamy, E., Programming in ANSI C, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2004. 
2. Lafore, R., Object-Oriented  Programming in C++, Fourth Edition, Pearson, 2002. 
3. Burden,  R. L., Numerical Analysis, Ninth Edition, Cengage Learning India, 2012. 

Reference Books  
1. Schildt, H., C: The Complete Reference, Fourth Edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 2000. 
2. Datta,  B. N., Numerical Linear Algebra and Applications, 2nd Edition, PHI, 2010. 

Online Course Material  
1. Kumar, S.A., Principles of Programming Languages, NPTEL Course Material, 

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102067/.   

2. Gupta, D., Introduction to Problem Solving and Programming, NPTEL Course 
Material, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106104074/. 

3. Nayak,  A. K. and Kumar S., Numerical methods, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107105/. 
 

 
 

12 
 



Course Title Abstract Algebra Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. To train the student in the domain of Abstract Algebra. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest.  

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Modules, Dual modules, Cyclic Primary modules and Decomposition theorem. 
2. Nilpotent and Solvable groups, Galois Theory, splitting Fields, Normal extension, 
Fundamental theorem of Galois theory  

 
Contents: 
 
Group Theory [10 lectures]: Review of Group theory (Symmetric Groups, 
Transformation Groups), Abelian groups, Sylow Theorems, nilpotent and solvable 
groups. 
 
Ring Theory [11 lectures]: Rings, Polynomial Rings, Prime ideals, Maximal Ideals, 
Principal Ideal Domain, Unique Factorization domain, Euclidian Algorithm.  
 
Field extensions [5 lectures]: Finite extension, algebraic extensions. 
 
Galois Theory [16 lectures]: Galois Theory, splitting Fields, Normal extension, 
Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory and its applications. 
 
 
Text Book 

1. Cohn, P. M., Basic algebra: Groups, rings and fields, 2 Ed., Springer, 2005 
2. Jacobson, N., Basic Algebra I, Dover Publication, 2009 
3. Jacobson, N., Basic Algebra II, Dover Publication, 2012 

 
Reference Books 

1. Artin, M., Algebra, Second Edition, Pearson, 2010 
4. Dummit, D. S. and Foote, R. M., Abstract algebra, 3 Ed., Wiley, 2004 
5. Stewart, I., Galois Theory, Third Edition, Chapman and Hall, 2003 

 
Online Course Material: 

1. Gross, B., Abstract Algebra, Online Course Material, Harvard Extension School, 
http://matterhorn.dce.harvard.edu/engage/ui/index.html#/1999/01/82345 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

13 
 



Course Title Complex Analysis Course No. MAL5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. To train the student in the area of complex analysis. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for 

further applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Cauchy-Riemann Equations, Homotopy of paths. 
2. Cauchy-Goursat theorem and Cauchy’s Integral Formula. 
3. Evaluation of improper integrals. 

 
Contents 
 

Introduction to functions of complex variables [14 Lectures]: Elementary functions, 
continuity, differentiability, Analytic Functions, Cauchy Riemann Equations. 
 
Complex Integration[14 Lectures]: Line and Contour Integrals, anti-derivatives of a 
complex function, Cauchy-Goursat Theorem, Simply and multiply connected domains, 
Cauchy’s Integral formula, Taylor and Laurent Series expansion, Liouville’s Theorem, 
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, Maximum modulus principle. 
 
Residue Theory[10 Lectures] Residues and poles, Cauchy’s residue theorem, Jordan’s 
Theorem, evaluation of Improper integrals 
 
Conformal mappings[4 Lectures]: Conformal mapping, Special transformation, 
Mobious transformation. 

 
Text Books 

1. Lang, S., Complex Analysis, Fourth Edition, Springer-Verlag, 1999 
2. Brown, J. W. and Churchill, R. V., Complex variables and applications, 9 Ed., 

McGraw Hill Publications, 2013 
 
Reference Books 

1. Ahlfors, L.V., Complex Analysis, 3rd edition, McGraw Hill, 2000. 
2. Ablowitz, M. J., and Fokas, A. S., Complex variables: Introduction and 

applications, 2 Ed., Cambridge University Press, 2003. 
3. Shastri, A.R., An Introduction to Complex Analysis, Macmillan India, New Delhi, 

1999. 
 

Online Resources 
1. Sree Krishna, P.A.S., Complex Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 

Mathematics, IIT Guwahati,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111103070/ 
2. Swaminathan, A. and Katiyar, V.K. Complex Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, 

Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107056/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 



Course Title Partial Differential Course No. MAL6XX0 
Equations 

Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. Introduce the concepts of existence and uniqueness of solution of partial differential 

equations 
2. Develop analytical techniques to solve partial differential equations 
3. Understand the properties of solution of partial differential equations 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding existence, uniqueness, and other properties of a solution of partial 

differential equations 
2. Solving partial differential equations with Fourier series method, Green's function 

method,  Laplace transform method, and Fourier transform method 
 
Contents 
 

Motivations and origins [3 Lectures]:  PDEs of engineering and physics (Heat, wave and 
Laplace equations). 
 
First order partial differential equations [9 Lectures]: Linear, quasi-linear and fully 
nonlinear equations, Lagrange method, the Cauchy problem, Cauchy method of 
characteristics, compatible systems, Charpit method.  
 
Second order partial differential equations [12 Lectures]: Classification and Canonical 
forms, Adjoint operators, Riemann’s method, solving linear partial differential equations 
with constant coefficients. 
 
Elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic equations[16 Lectures]: Variable separation method for 
Laplace/Poisson equation, heat conduction equation, wave equation, Burger equation,  
D’Alembert’s solution,  Maximum-Minimum principles, Duhamel’s principle, solutions by 
Green’s function method. 
 

Text Books 
1. Rao, K. S., Introduction to partial differential equations, 3rd Edition, PHI, 2011 
2. Logan, J. D., Applied partial differential equations, 3rd  Ed., Springer, 2015 
3. Pinchover, Y. and Rubinstein, J., An introduction to partial differential equations, 

Cambridge University Press, 2005 
 
Reference Books 

1. Sneddon, I. N., Elements of Partial Differential Equations, McGraw-Hill, New 
York,1986 

2. Prasad, P. And Ravindran, R.,  Partial differential equations, New Age 
International Publisher, 2005 

3. Mattheij, R. M. M., Rienstra, S. W., and ten Thije Boonkkamp, J. H. M., Partial 
Differential Equations: Modeling, Analysis, Computation, SIAM Publication, 2005 

 
Online Course Material  

1. Agrawal, P. N. and Pandey D.N., Ordinary and partial differential equations and 
applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107111/ 

2. Sinha, R. K., Partial differential equations, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111103021/ 

15 
 



Title Functional Analysis Number MAL6XX0 

Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 
[3] 

Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To introduce the area of Functional analysis. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for further 

applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Basic idea of a normed linear spaces and operators on normed linear space. 
2. Open Mapping theorem, Hahn-Banach Theorem and their applications. 

 
Contents  

Normed Linear Spaces[14 Lectures]: Normed linear space, subspace of a normed linear 
space, Equivalent norms, Finite Dimensional normed linear spaces, Banach spaces, 
Linear operator, norm of a linear operator, boundedness and continuity, Quotient spaces. 
 
Integrability and Extension Theorems[19 Lectures]: Integrable functions, l_p spaces, 
Minkowski's inequality, Holder's inequality, separability of l_p spaces, uniformly bounded 
operator, principle of uniform boundedness, Sub-linear functional, Semi-norm, Open 
mapping theorem, Closed graph theorem, Hahn-Banach Theorem, dual of a normed 
linear space, reflexive normed linear space. 

 
Hilbert Spaces and their Applications [9 Lectures]: Inner product spaces, polarisation 
identity, Bessel's inequality, Hilbert space, Riesz representation theorem, Operators on 
Hilbert spaces, compact operators, projections and idempotents.  
 
Text Books  

1. Limaye, B. V., Functional Analysis, Second Edition, New Age International, 1996 
2. Lax, P. D., Functional Analysis, First Edition, 2001 
3. Ruddin, W., Functional Analysis, 2nd Ed., McGraw Hill Education, 2017 

 
Reference Books  

1. Conway, J. B., A course in Functional Analysis, Second Edition, Springer-Verlag, 
1994 

2. Goffman, C., and Pedrick, G., A First Course in Functional Analysis, Prentice-Hall, 
1974 
 

Online Course Material  
1. Srivastava, P. D., Functional Analysis,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of 

Mathematics, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/111105037/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

16 
 



Course Title Data Structures and Algorithms Course No. MAP5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–2-0 [2] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. To provide sufficient skills to prove and analyze efficiency of the algorithms.  
2. To introduce elementary data structures and related operations. 

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Ability to design correct programs to solve problems.  
2. Skills to choose efficient data structures and apply them to solve problems. 
3.  Ability to show the correctness and efficiency of a program. 

 
 
Contents 
 
Performance of algorithms[3 lectures]: Algorithm Development, Complexity analysis 
and asymptotics.  
 
Data structures [11 lectures]: Arrays, pointers, linked lists, stacks, queues, binary 
trees, tree traversals.  
 
A programming laboratory will be set in consonance with the topics covered in 
lectures. This will include assignments in a programming language like C and C++ in 
GNU Linux environment. 

 
 
Text Books 

1. Cormen, T.H., Leiserson, C.E., Rivest, R.L. and Stein, C., Introduction to 
Algorithms, 2nd Ed.,Prentice-Hall of India, 2007. 

2. Sahni, S., Data Structures, Algorithms and Applications in C++, 2nd Ed., 
Universities Press, 2005. 
 

Reference Books 
1. Aho, A. V., Ullman, J. D., and Hopcroft, J. E. (1985), Data Structures and 

Algorithms, Addison-Wesley.  
2. Goodrich, M.T. and Tamassia, R., Data Structures and Algorithms in Java, Wiley, 

2006. 
 
Online course material 

1. Garg, N., Data Structures And Algorithms, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102064/. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 



Title Topology Number MAL6XX0 

Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 
[3] 

Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To train the students in the domain of Topology. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for further 

applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Topological spaces, order topology and product topology. 
2. Separation axioms, countability axioms Urysohn’s metrization theorem. 
3. Function spaces, pointwise and uniform convergence, Stone-Weierstrass Theorem.  
 
Contents  
 

Basic Topology [14 Lectures]: Topological spaces, basis and sub-basis, order topology, 
product topology, subspace topology, convergence, closed sets, continuous functions, 
quotient topology  
 
Properties of Topological Spaces [17 Lectures]: Connected spaces, Components, local 
connectedness, compact spaces, limit point compactness, local compactness, 
Countability axioms, separation axioms, normal spaces, Tychonoff spaces, Urysohn’s 
metrization theorem, Tietze extension theorem, Tychonoff theorem, Stone-Cech 
compactification 

 
Special Topics [09 Lectures]: Function spaces, pointwise and uniform convergence, 
compact-open topology, uniform convergence on compact set, Stone-Weierstrass 
Theorem. 
 
 
Text Books  

1. Munkres, J., Topology, second edition, Pearson Publications, 2000 
2. Willard, S., General Topology, Dover Publications, 2004 

 
Reference Books  

1. Pervin, W. J. and Boas, R. P., Foundations of general topology, Academic Press, 
1964 

2. Simmons, G. F., Introdunction to topology and modern analysis, Tata McGraw-
Hill, 2004 

 
Online Course Material  

1. Veeramani, P., Topology, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT 
Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106054/. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 



(9) Content of Elective courses: 

 
Title Measure and Integration Number MAL7XX0 

Department Mathematics L-T-P-D 3–0–0-0 [3] 
[C] 

Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  

1. Provide background in the area of Measure Theory. 
2. Provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for 

further applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  

1.  Provide basic understanding of the measures, total variation, absolute continuity, 
and Radon-Nikodym Theorem. 

2.  Impart knowledge in Derivatives of measures, Fundamental Theorem, product 
measures, Fubini’s Theorem, convolutions, Distribution functions. 

 
Contents  
 

Basics of Measure and Integration [12 Lectures]: Riemann Integration and need for 
generalization, Measurable Sets, measurable functions, functions between measurable 
spaces, Measures on Algebra of Sets, Extension Theorems, Lebesgue and Lebesgue-
Stieltjes measure, Measure, measure spaces. 
 
Integrability [14 Lectures]: Simple functions and their integrals, integral of a non-
negative measurable function, integral of extended real valued non-negative function, 
Monotone Convergence Theorem, Fatou’s lemma, Integrable functions, Lebesgue 
Dominated Convergence Theorem, Lebesgue Spaces L_p, Holder’s Inequality, 
Minkowski’s Inequality, completeness theorem, L_{\infinity}. 
 
Modes of convergence [6 Lectures]: Relations between convergence almost 
everywhere, convergence in measure and convergence in L_p spaces, Egoroff’s 
Theorem. 
 
Special Theorems (without proof) [14 Lectures]: Hahn Decomposition Theorem, Jordan 
Decomposition Theorem, Radon-Nikodym Theorem, Lebesgue Decomposition 
Theorem, Riesz Representation Theorem for L_p spaces. 

 
Textbook  

1. Royden, H.L., (1988), Real analysis, 3rd Edition, Macmillan Publishing Company, 
New York 

2. Bartle,R.G., (2014), The Elements of Integration and Lebesgue Measure, John 
Wiley & Sons 

3.  Inder K.Rana, (2007), An Introduction to Measure and Integration, Narosa. 
 
Reference Books  

1. Parthasarathy, K.R., 2005, Introduction to Probability and Measure, TRIM Series, 
Vol. 33, Hindustan book agency, New Delhi. 

2. Halmos, P.R., 1976, Measure Theory, 1st Edition, Springer. 
  
Online Course Material  

1. Rana, I.K., Measure Theory, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, 
IIT Bombay, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_ma15/ 

19 
 



 
Title Financial Engineering Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  

1. Securities Pricing Securities, Risk Management Assessment, prediction and decision 
making, under uncertainty, regarding future events and their consequences 

2. Portfolio Optimization Balancing risk and return 
3. Modeling Pricing of derivatives and Itos calculus 

 
Learning Outcomes  

1. Valuation of financial portfolio 
2. Pricing of financial derivatives (options and contracts) 
3. Understanding risk and return 

 
Contents  
 

[18 lectures]:Introduction to financial markets and financial instruments, financial 
derivatives, risk and return, risky and risk free assets, interest rates, bonds, bonds pricing, 
spot and forward rates, investment portfolio, mean-variance analysis, capital asset pricing 
model, arbitrage pricing theory. 
 
[22 lectures]:Discrete time models, stock and money market models, principle of no 
arbitrage, pricing of contracts (forward and future), options, put-call parity, option pricing, 
martingales, Binomial model, CRR model, Black-Scholes formula, Greeks, random walk, 
Brownian motion, stochastic process, Itos integral and Ito-Deoblins formula. 
 
Textbook  

1. M. Capinski and T. Zastawniak, Mathematics for finance: an introduction to financial 
engineering, Springer, 2010.  

2. S.N. Neftci, Principles of financial engineering. Academic Press/Elsevier, 2009. 
 
Reference Books  

1. J.C. Hull, Options, futures and other derivatives. Pearson India, 2011. 
2. S.E. Shreve, Stochastic calculus for finance I: The binomial asset pricing model, 

Springer, 2000. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 



 
Course Title Wavelet Analysis and Applications Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. To introduce the origin of wavelet transform 
2. To develop the understanding of multiresolution analysis for different types of 

signals 
3. To equip the students with various possible applications of the wavelet transform 

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Strong understanding of Fourier and wavelet transform. 
2. Answer to the question why wavelet transform is a better tool for signal analysis. 
3. Implement and apply wavelet transform for various applications. 

 
Contents 
Fourier Analysis [12 Lectures]: Fourier and inverse Fourier transforms, Gabor 
transform, short time Fourier transform and the uncertainty principle. 
 
Wavelet Analysis [18 Lectures]: Mother wavelet, orthogonal and biorthogonal 
wavelets, continuous and discrete wavelet transform, basic properties of wavelet 
transforms, multiresolution analysis, Haar wavelet transform, Dabuchies Wavelet 
Transform, wave-packet transform 
 
Applications [12 Lectures]: Application of wavelet theory to feature detection, image 
denoising and compression. 

 
Text Books 

1. Chui, C. K., An Introduction to Wavelets, Academic Press Inc., New York, 1992. 
2. Debnath, L., Wavelet Transforms and Their Applications, Birkhauser, 2002. 
3. Mallat, S., A Wavelet Tour of Signal Processing, Academic Press, 1999. 

 
Reference Books 

1. Daubechies, I., Ten Lectures on Wavelets, Society for Industrial and Applied 
Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA, 1992 

2. Akansu, A.N.,  and Haddad, R.A.,  Multiresolution signal Decomposition: 
Transforms, Subbands and Wavelets, Academic Press, Oranld, Florida, 1992 

3. Kaiser, G., A Friendly Guide to Wavelets, Birkhauser, New York, 1995. 
 
Online course Material  

1. Gadre, V.M., Fundamentals of Wavelets, Filter Banks and Time Frequency 
Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108101093/. 

2. Strang, G. and Amaratunga, K., Wavelets, Filter Banks and Applications, Online 
Course Material, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-327-wavelets-filter-banks-and-
applications-spring-2003/.  

 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 



Course Title Optimization Techniques Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. To train the student in the domain of linear and non-linear programming 
2. To give sufficient tools for solving programming problems which can be used by 

student for further applications in different areas of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Simplex method, Charne’s M-method, Two-phase Method 
2. Duality and Integer programming problem 
3. Transportation problem, assignment Problem, Karmakar’s Algorithm and Wolf’s 

method 
4. Newton’s method, Conjugate direction method and Quasi-Newton methods 
5. KKT conditions, penalty and Barrier Methods, exact penalty functions  

 
Contents 
Linear Programming [23 lectures]: Linear combination of vectors, Convex set, Convex 
hull, Linear programming problem, feasible solution, basic feasible solution, graphical 
solution,  Simplex method Charne’s M method, Two phase method, Solving system of 
equations and finding the inverse of a matrix using simplex method, duality, 
Complementary Slackness Theorem, Duality and Simplex method, dual simplex 
algorithm, Integer Programming, Gomory’s cut-constraint method, Branch and Bound 
method, Transportation problem, Assignment problem, application of optimization.  
 
Nonlinear Programming [19 lectures]: First and second order conditions, Iterative 
methods, line search methods, global convergence of descent algorithms, Newton’s 
method, Conjugate direction method, Quasi-Newton Method, Constrained optimization 
- Lagrange Multipliers, Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions, Regular points, Sensitivity 
analysis, Quadratic Programming, Convex problems, applications of optimization. 

 
Text Book 

1. Luenberger, D. G., Linear and Nonlinear Programming, Yinyu Ye, Third  Edition, 
Springer, 2008.  

2. Kambo, N. S., Mathematical Programming Techniques,  Second Edition, Affiliated 
East West Press, 2005  

 
Reference Books 

1. Bazaraa, M. S., Sherali, H.D., and Shetty, C. M., Nonlinear Programming: Theory 
and Algorithms, Third Edition, Wiley publications, 2006 

2. Darst, R, Introduction to Linear Programming: Applications and Extensions, 
Dekker Publications, 1991 

 
Online Course Material: 

1. Goswami, A., Optimization, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, 
IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105039/1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 



Course Title Numerical Analysis Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. Learn numerical techniques for a variety of mathematical problems 
2. Analyze the validity and error in the numerical results 

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Develop an understanding of numerical error and applicability of a particular 
method. 

2. Solve numerically algebraic equations, linear systems of equations, ordinary 
differential equations and eigenvalue problems. 

3. Carry out numerical differentiation, integration, and interpolation 
Contents 

Errors analysis[4 Lectures]: Numerical Algorithms and errors, Floating point systems, 
Types of error, Propagation of Error, the stability of algorithms. 
Nonlinear equations [8 Lectures]: Newton-Raphson Method, Fixed-Point Iteration 
Method, Muller’s method, criterion for acceptance of a root, Rates of Convergence. 

Numerical solution of linear system of equations [8 Lectures]: Ill- conditioned systems, 
iterative methods (Gauss-Seidel method, Gauss-Jacobi method), matrix inversion, Rate 
of Convergence, Rayleigh Quotient, Min-max principle, the power and inverse power 
methods for eigenvalue problems. 

Interpolation [8 Lectures]: Errors in polynomial interpolation, finite differences, 
Newton’s formulae for interpolation, Lagrange interpolation formula, Hermite 
interpolation, Spline interpolation. 

Numerical Integration and Differentiation [6 Lectures]: Newton-Cotes integration 
formulae, Difference Formulae, Method of Undetermined Coefficients. 

Numerical IVPs for Ordinary Differential Equations [8 Lectures]: Taylor series method, 
Euler’s Method, Modified Euler’s Methods, Runge-Kutta Methods. 

Tools to be used: MATLAB, Mathematica, Octave, Scilab. 

 
Text Books 

1. Süli, E. and Mayers, D.F., An Introduction to Numerical Analysis, Cambridge Uni. 
Press, 2006. 

2. Sastry, S.S., Introductory Methods of Numerical Analysis, Prentice Hall of India 
Pvt. Ltd., 2007. 

3. Burden, R. L., Numerical Analysis, 9th Edition, Cengage Learning India, 2012 
 
Reference Books 

1. Conte, S.D. and Boor, C., Elementary Numerical Analysis: An Algorithmic 
Approach, Third Edition, McGraw-Hill Publication, 1980 

2. Chapra, S.C., Applied Numerical Methods with MATLAB for Engineers and 
Scientists, 3 Ed., McGraw Hill, 2012 

 
Online course Material  

1. Lal, R. and Banerjee S., Numerical Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107062/ 

2. Usha, R., Numerical Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106101/ 

 
 

23 
 



Course Title Number Theory Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
 1.To give basic knowledge of Number theory. 
 2. To equip students with number theoretic tools which can be used in their fields of 
interest. 

 
Learning Outcomes 
 1. Basic knowledge of Residue systems and RSA Cryptosystems. 
 2. Diophantine Equations, Pells Equation, Binary Quadratic Forms and their Applications. 
 
Contents 
Introduction [10 Lectures]: Divisibility, prime numbers, properties and their distribution, 
complete and reduced residue systems, theorems of Fermat, Euler & Wilson, application to 
RSA cryptosystem. 

Congruences [10 Lectures]: Linear congruences, Chinese Remainder theorem, quadratic 
congruences, and Quadratic Reciprocity law. 

Arithmetical functions [15 Lectures]: examples, properties and their rate of growth, 
Continued fractions, and their connections with Diophantine approximations, applications 
to linear and Pell’s equations, Binary quadratic forms, Partition: basic properties and 
results. 

Diophatine equations [6 Lectures]: linear, quadratic and higher degree, some general 
equations. 

 
Text Books  

1. David M. Burton, Elementary Number Theory. McGraw Hill Education, 2012. 
2. G. H. Hardy and E. M. Wright. An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers. Oxford 

University Press, 1960. 
 
Reference Books 

1. Niven, H. S. Zuckerman and H. L. Montgomery. An Introduction to the Theory of 
Numbers, Wiley, 1991 

2. K. Ireland, and M. Rosen. A Classical Introduction to Modern Number Theory. GTM-
84, Springer, 1990. 

 
Online Resources 

1. Saikia, A., Number Theory, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT 
Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111103020/. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

24 
 



Title Statistical Inference Number MAL7XX0 
Departmet Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/Ph.D. (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  

1. To provide background in the area of Statistics. 
2. To provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for 

further applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  

1.  Basic understanding of the Point and Interval Estimation, Testing of Hypotheses, 
Non-parametric Estimation 

2.  Knowledge in Random Sampling, Unbiased Estimation, Bias-Variance Tradeoff, 
Goodness of Fit.  

 
Contents  
Random Sampling & Sampling Distributions [5 lectures]: Random sampling, exact 
sampling distributions: Chi-square, t and F distributions, large sample theory. 

Point and Interval Estimations [16 lectures]: Point estimator, properties of an estimator, 
factorization, MVUE, maximum likelihood method of estimation, Cramer-Rao bound, 
confidence interval estimation. 

Tests of Hypotheses [21 lectures]: Review of hypotheses testing, Neyman-Pearson theory, 
general linear hypothesis, method of least squares, analysis of variance (one way and two 
way), analysis of categorical data, Chi-square test for goodness of fit, test of 
independence, non-parametric tests. 

 
Text Books  

1. Rohatgi, V. K., Statistical Inference, Dover Publications Inc., 2003. 
2. Hogg, R. V., McKean, J. W., Craig, A. T., Introduction to Mathematical Statistics, 

Pearson, 2009. 
 
Reference Books  

1. Casella, G. and Berger, R. L., Statistical Inference, Brooks/Cole Publishing Company, 
2003. 

2. Rao, C. R., Linear Statistical Inference and Its Applications, Wiley, 2006. 
3. Gibbons, J.D. and Chakroborti, S., Nonparametric Statistical Inference, CRC Press, 

2010 
 

Online Course material: 
1. Zhou Fan, Introduction to Statistical Inference, Online Course Material, Stanford 

University, http://web.stanford.edu/class/stats200/ 
2. Kumar, S., Statistical Inference, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 

Mathematics, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105124/ 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 



Title Stochastic Calculus Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D 3–0–0-0 

[C] [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/Ph.D.(MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  

1. To develop an understanding of financial market 
2. Given a discrete process, pricing of options, such as European, American, Asian 

and other exotic options 
3. To develop an understanding of change of measure, Martingales and Brownian 

motion 
4. Use of Black-Scholes model under various conditions 

 
Learning Outcomes  

1. Understanding derivatives and securities 
2. Pricing and valuation in discrete case 
3. Binomial model and self-financing strategy 
4. Black Scholes model and interest rate models 

 
Contents  
 
[10 lectures]:General probability spaces, Gaussian and log-normal distribution, 
martingales and stopping times, Brownian motion and its properties, Ito’s integral and 
martingale properties of Ito’s integral. 
 
[12 lectures]:Continuous time financial market models, Black-Scholes-Merton model, 
Black-Scholes PDE and formulas, risk-neutral valuation, option pricing, the Greeks, put-
call parity, Risk-neutral valuation, risk-neutral measure, Girsanov's theorem for change 
of measure, martingale representation theorems, representation of Brownian 
martingales 
 
[20 lectures]:Stochastic differential equations, existence and uniqueness of solutions, 
Feynman-Kac formula and its applications, models with stochastic volatility, pricing and 
hedging in incomplete markets, bond markets, term-structures of interest rates, bond 
pricing, Short rate models, martingale models for short rate, Vasicek, Cox-Ingersoll-Ross 
and Hull-White models, multifactor models; Forward rate models, Heath-Jarrow-Morton 
model. 
 
Textbooks  

1. Shreve, S. E., Stochastic Calculus for Finance I; The Binomial Asset Pricing Model 
, Springer-Verlag, 2004  

2. Shreve, S. E., Stochastic Calculus for Finance II; Continuous-Time Model, 
Springer, 2004. 
 

Reference Books  
     1. Baxter, M. and Rennie, A., Financial Calculus, University Press, Cambridge 1996 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

26 
 



Title Calculus of variations and Integral Number MAL7XX0 
Equations 

Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-D [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/Ph.D.(MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce variational problems with methods to solve them. 
2. Introduce the integral transforms and integral equations, and their solution 

methods 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Maximize or minimize functionals associated with the variational problems. 
2. Apply integral transforms to solve differential equations. 
3. Solve Fredholm and Volterra integral equations. 

 
Contents  
 

Calculus of Variation [20 Lectures]: Introduction to Variational problems, functionals, 
Functional dependence on first order derivatives, Euler equations, Functional dependence 
on functions of several independent variables, Variational problems with moving 
boundaries, Rayleigh-Ritz and Galerkin’s Method. 

Integral Transforms [8 Lectures]: Fourier, Fourier sine/cosine and Laplace transforms 
and their properties, convolution theorem and application to solve differential equations. 

Integral Equations [12 Lectures]: Classification of Integral equations, Neumann’s 
iterative method for Fredholm’s equation of the second kind, Volterra type integral 
equations, Integral equations of the first kind and Convolution type Integral Equations. 

 
Text books  

1. Gupta, A.S., Calculus of Variation, Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd. 1996 
2. Debnath L. and Bhatta, D., Integral transformations and their applications, 2nd 

Edition,  Chapman and Hall / CRC publications, 2007 
3. Moiseiwitsch, B. L., Integral equations, Logman, 1977 

 
Reference Books  

1. Gelfand, I. M. and Francis, S.V., Calculus of Variation, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 
1963 

2. Yosida, K., Lectures on differential and integral equations, Dover, 1991 
3. Hildebrand, F. B. , Methods of applied mathematics, 2nd Ed, Prentice-Hall, 1965 

 
Online Course Material  

1. Agrawal, P.N. and Pandey, D.N., Integral equations, calculus of variations and its 
applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107103/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 



Title Chaos Theory and its Applications Number MA7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 

[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  

1. To equip the students with the basic fundamentals of chaos theory. 
2. Learning and understanding various routes to chaos.  
3. To introduce applications of chaos to various physical systems and its introduction 

in IFS. 
 
Learning Outcomes  

1. Notion of chaos in one dimension. 
2. Understanding Bifurcation theory and different routes to chaos. 
3. Two dimensional flows, phase portraits and chaos in higher dimension. 

 
Contents  
Discrete Dynamical Systems[16 Lectures]: One dimensional maps, Fixed points, periodic 
points and Stability, Basin of Attraction, Bifurcation, period doubling and route to chaos, 
Sharkovsky’s theorem, Li-Yorke Theorem, Lorentz System and chaos, Chaos in one 
dimension, density of periodic points, transitivity, sensitive dependence on initial 
conditions, cantor’s set, conjugacy, symbolic dynamics, Various notions of chaos, Phase 
space diagrams, Linear Systems and their stability. 
 
Continuous Dynamical Systems[14 Lectures]: One dimensional flows, chaos in one 
dimension, Fixed points and Stability, Flows on the circle, Bifurcation, Saddle node 
Bifurcation, Transcritical Bifurcation, Pitchfork Bifurcation, Hopf Bifurcation, phase 
portraits,  existence and uniqueness, fixed points and linearization, conservative 
systems, limit cycles, Poincare-Bendixson Theorem.   
 
Fractals and Dynamical Systems[12 Lectures]: Fractals, cantor set, dimension of self-
similar fractals, Box dimension, correlation dimension, Iterated Function System, Collage 
Theorem and Image Compression, Julia and Mandelbrot Sets. 
 
Textbook  

1. Saber N.  Elaydi, Discrete Chaos: With Applications in Science and Engineering, 
CRC Press, Second Edition. 

2. Steven H.  Strogatz, Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos:  With Applications to 
Physics, Biology, Chemistry and Engineering, Westview Press, First edition. 

 
Reference Books  

1. H Nagashima and Y Baba, Introduction to Chaos:  Physics and Mathematics of 
Chaotic Phenomena, CRC Press; First edition. 

2. G. Stuck and Michael Brin, Introduction to Dynamical Systems, Cambridge 
University Press; First edition 

 
Online Course Material  

1. Nagar A. (IIT Delhi) Chaotic Dynamical Systems, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111102110/ 

2. Banerjee S. (IIT Kharagpur), Chaos, Fractals and Dynamic Systems,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105054/ 

 
 
 
 

28 
 



Title Machine Learning and Pattern Number MA7XX0 
Recognition 

Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 
[3] 

Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce the mathematical and statistical techniques used in pattern recognition. 
2. Impart knowledge on differentiate among various pattern recognition techniques. 

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Formulate high dimensional feature vectors from observations. 
2. Select an appropriate pattern analysis tool for analysing data in a given feature 

space. 
3. Apply pattern analysis tools to practical applications and detect patterns in the 

data. 
 
Contents  
Introduction [2 Lectures]: Definitions, data sets for Pattern Recognition, Different 
Paradigms of Pattern Recognition. 
 
Bayes Decision Theory [8 Lectures]: Bayes Decision Theory: Bayes decision rule, 
Minimum error rate classification, Normal density and discriminant functions, Bayesian 
networks. 
 
Generative Methods [8 Lectures]: Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian Parameter 
Estimation, Nonparametric techniques. 
 
Discriminative Methods [8 Lectures]: Distance-based methods, Linear Discriminant 
Functions, Artificial Neural Networks, Support Vector Machines. 
 
Clustering and Principal Component Analysis [8 Lectures]: k-means clustering, Gaussian 
Mixture Modeling, EM-algorithm, PCA, Kernel PCA, Probabilistic PCA. 
 
Combining Classifiers [8 Lectures]: Bagging and Boosting, Adaboost, Bayesian Model 
Averaging. 
 
Textbook  

1. Duda, R. O., Hart, P. E. and Stork, D., Pattern Classification 2/e, Wiley, 2002.  
2. Bishop, C., Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer, 2006. 

 
Reference Books  

1. Theodoridis, S. and Koutroumbas, K. (2008) Pattern Recognition, Edition 4. 
Academic Press.  

2. MacKay, D.J.C. (2004) Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algorithms, 
Cambridge University Press. 

3. Cristianini, N. and Taylor, J. S. (2000) An Introduction to Support Vector 
Machines, Cambridge University Press. 

 
Online Course Material  

1. Das, S. and Murthy, C.A. (IIT Madras) Pattern Recognition, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106046/ 
 

29 
 



Title Numerical solutions of Partial Differential Number MAL8XX0 
Equations 

Department Mathematics L-T-P 3–0–0 [3] 
[C] 

Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite Partial Differential Equations   
 
Objectives  

The Instructor will introduce  
1. finite difference schemes for numerical solutions of partial differential equations 
2. carry out numerical analysis of various finite difference schemes  

 
Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. apply finite difference schemes for numerical solution of partial differential 

equations 
2. carry out error analysis and stability analysis of finite difference schemes 

 
Contents  
 

Fractal 1: Numerical methods for PDE (MAL8XX1) 
 
[8 Lectures] Characterization of PDEs, Finite difference methods for elliptic, parabolic 
and hyperbolic problems. 
 
[6 Lectures]Stability, consistency and convergence theory, dissipation and dispersion, 
error estimates. 
 
Fractal 2: Numerical Analysis for PDE (MAL8XX2) 
 
Parabolic equations [6 Lectures]: Fourier analysis of the error, Alternating direction 
implicit method 
 
Elliptic equations [6 Lectures]: Stability analysis by the energy method, Error analysis 
with a maximum principle, asymptotic error estimates, convergence result 
 
Hyperbolic equations[10 Lectures]: CFL condition, Von Neumann stability Analysis, 
upwind scheme, Lax-Wendroff scheme, leap-frog scheme, Hamiltonian systems and 
symplectic schemes 
 
Numerical linear algebra[6 Lectures]: Classical iterative Methods for solving linear 
systems, large sparse linear systems, GMRES algorithm, preconditioned Conjugate 
Gradient method, multigrid method (overview), Newton's method and its variations for 
solving nonlinear systems. 
 
Text books  

1. Quarteroni, A. and Valli, A. , Numerical Approximation of Partial Differential 
Equations, Springer, 1997 

2. Morton, K. W.  and Mayers, D. F. , Numerical solution of partial differential 
equations, CUP, 2005 

 
Reference Books  

1. Thomas, J. W. , Numerical partial differential equations: Finite difference 
methods, Springer, 1995 

2. Trefethen, L. N. and David Bau III, Numerical Linear Algebra, SIAM, 1997 
 
Online Course Material  

30 
 



1. Nayak, A. K., Numerical methods: Finite Difference Approach, NPTEL Course, 
Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107107/. 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

31 
 



 

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

 

   

 

 

 

 

PG Course Booklet 

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

July 2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 yr M.Sc. Chemistry  

 

Curriculum Structure 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

2 
 



Introduction to the Program 
Chemistry involves the study of substances, their properties, structures, reactions and 
transformations. Chemistry is interlinked with various scientific disciplines and play an 
important role in our daily life. It broadly covers various areas including medicinal 
chemistry, analytical chemistry, organometallic chemistry, polymer chemistry, quantum 
chemistry, catalysis and many aspects of materials science. In the modern society, 
knowledge of Chemistry is essential for addressing most of the real-life challenges related 
to water, energy, food, agriculture, security and healthcare.   
 
Objectives of the Program 
The major objective of the program is to bring out professionals having fundamental 
knowledge, and specific skill sets of various aspects of chemistry such as Organic 
Reactions and their Mechanism, Main-Group and Transition Metals, Organometallics and 
Catalysis, Physical and Spectroscopic techniques, Inorganic and Solid State Material 
synthesis, Computational and Theoretical Chemistry.  
The department focuses on preparing future students to take up challenges at various 
levels of academics, R&Ds and industries. 
 
Expected Graduate Attributes 
(1) Capability to appreciate synthetic methods for development of important chemical 
products such as pharmaceutical drugs, paints, petrochemicals, food additives, plastics 
etc.  
(2) Ability to use characterization tools for analysing reactions and monitoring chemical 
processes for product development.  
(3) Ability to handle analytical, spectroscopic, microscopic and other instrumental 
methods for interdisciplinary research areas. 
(4) Use of computational tools to understand and analyse chemical and biophysical 
processes, molecular structures and advanced materials. 
(5) Ability to comprehend, write and present scientific articles and technical reports. 
(6) Develop oral and written communication skills. 
(7) Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics and sense of intellectual 
integrity.  
(8) Ability to plan and manage technical research projects and work in a team. 

 
Program Learning outcome 
 
(1) Strong fundamentals in theoretical and practical aspects of organic, inorganic and 
physical chemistry.  
(2) Develop appreciation of hands-on wet chemistry, analytical, instrumentation, and 
experimental data handling skills to solve scientific problems to address technological 
challenges in various domains.  
(3) Knowledge of computational and theoretical chemistry. 
(4) Skills for material synthesis and processes for device integration 
(5) Develop the ability to exercise independent learning, thinking and problem solving 
skills. 
(6) Develop the ability to interact in a cross-cultural environment and acquire time and 
project management skills for carrying out guided research work in any of the research 
area related to science and technology.  
(7) Develop skills to communicate scientific learning and present ideas. 
 

 

Course Curriculum Structure 

3 
 



 Course Number, L-T-P-D Credit  Cat. Course Number, L-T-P- Credit
Cat. Course Title s Course Title D s 
I Semester  II Semester 

MC  CYL6XX0 Organic 3-0-0-0  3   MC  CYL6XX0 Organic 3-0-0- 3  
Reactions and Synthesis 0  
Mechanisms  

MC  CYL6XX0Transition 3-0-0-0  3   MC  CYL6XX0 Solid State 3-0-0- 3  
Metal and and Material Chemistry  0  
Organometallic 
Chemistry  

MC  CYL6XX0 Quantum 3-0-0-0  3   MC  CYL6XX0 Molecular 3-0-0- 3  
Chemistry and  Thermodynamics and   0  
Spectroscopy  Chemical Kinetics  

MC  CYL6XX0 Physical 3-0-0-0  3   MC  CYL6XX0 Theory and 3-0-0- 3  
Organic Chemistry  Applications of 0   

spectroscopic 
techniques  

MC  CYL6XX0 Main Group 3-0-0-0  3   ME   Program elective-1  3-0-0- 3  
and Bioinorganic 0  
Chemistry 

MC  CYP6XX0Organic 0-0-3-0  1.5   MC  CYP6XX0 Physical   0-0-3- 1.5  
Laboratory  Laboratory  0  

MC  CYP6XX0 Inorganic 0-0-3-0  1.5   MC  CYD6XX0 Minor  0-0-3-  1.5  
Chemistry Laboratory  Project  0  

MC  CYP6XX0 Hands on -1  0-0-3-0  1.5   MC  CYP6XX0  Hands on-2 0-0-3- 1.5  
0   

 
Total 19.5  Total 19.5 

 

III Semester  IV Semester 

MO  Open elective-1  3-0-0-0  3   ME  Program Elective-5  3-0-0-0  3  

ME  Program Elective-2  3-0-0-0  3   ME  Program Elective-6  3-0-0-0  3  

ME  Program Elective-3  0-0-3-0  3   MO Open Elective -2  3-0-0-0  3  

ME  Program Elective-4  3-0-0-0  3   MP  CYD7XX0:Project  0-0-0- 10  
10  

MC  CYP6XX0:Computatio 0-0-1-0  1.5       
nal Lab  

MP  CYD7XX0 Project  0-0-0-5  5       

MC CYQ6XX0 Seminar  0-0-1-0  0.5       

Total 19  Total 19 
* Open Elective Courses can be taken in the third semester as well 

 

Total Credits: 77 

 

 

 

 

 

Topic Clouds for MSc Chemistry Curriculum 

4 
 



A. PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY 

       Topics  Sub-Topic Clouds  

Quantum Principles, Exactly solved problems, Approximation 
Chemistry  Methods, Electronic Structure Methods, Group Theory. 

Chemical Kinetics Molecular Thermodynamics, Chemical Kinetics, Catalysis, 
and Chemical Reaction Dynamics, Reaction Kinetics of special 
Thermodynamics  reactions.  

Spectroscopy  Fundamentals of Spectroscopic techniques and associated 
applications, Principles of NMR, Analytical Methods.  

Electrochemistry  Basics of Electrochemistry, DC and AC techniques, 
Photoelectrochemistry, Redox Reactions, Semiconductor 
Solution interfaces, Electrochemical Sensors, Electro-
transfer systems, Solar cells, Electrochemical Energy 
Storage Devices, Fuel cell.  

 Statistical Molecular simulation, Polymer dynamics, Statistical 
Mechanics  mechanics, Stochastic problems in biophysics.  

Hands on and Analytical Methods: UV-Vis, Fluorescence, FTIR etc. 
Experimental Electroanalytical methods (CV, EIS, GCD, 
Laboratory  Chronopotentiometry, Ampereometric and steady state 

techniques), Surface and Interface Chemistry: contact 
angle, surface tension, surface free energy, 
conductometric titrations.  

 

B. ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 

Topics Sub-Topic Clouds 

Organic Synthesis and Organic Reactions Mechanism and 
Catalysis  Rearrangements, Organic methods, Pericyclic 

reactions, Organic Photochemistry, Spectroscopy of 
Organic Compounds, Enolate chemistry, Radical 
Chemistry, catalysis in organic chemistry, 
Microwave Reactions, Heterocyclic Chemistry, 
Green Chemistry.  

Asymmetric Synthesis  Basics of Stereochemistry, Stereochemistry of 
Organic Compounds, Enantioselective Synthesis, 
Transition State Models and Reaction Outcome.  

Medicinal Chemistry and Fundamentals of Medicinal Chemistry, PK and PD, 
Drug Discovery  ADME-TOX, Lipinski‟s Rule, Basics of Drug 

Discovery, Heterocyclic compounds as leads, 
clinical trials  

5 
 



Natural Products Retrosynthetic Analysis, Natural Product Isolation, 
Total Synthesis of Natural Products 

Laboratory and Hand- Synthesis Protocols, Purification and Distillation 
on Techniques,  Chromatography Structural 

Determination of Organic compounds  

 

C. INORGANIC CHEMISTRY 

Topic Cloud Sub-Topic Clouds 

Transition Metal, General consideration of d block elements, 
Coordination Coordination complexes: Structure, Bonding and 
chemistry, and Properties, Reaction Mechanism. Molecular Complexes, 
Organometallics  Coordination polymers and their properties. 

Organometallic complexes: synthesis, reactivity and 
catalytic applications. 

Solid -State Materials Crystal Structures, X-Ray Diffraction Techniques, 
Chemistry  Synthesis and Physical Characterization of Materials, 

Bonding in Solids and properties,  Compound 
semiconductors, molecular magnets and magnetic 
properties, Defects and Non-stoichiometry, 
Nanomaterials with low-dimensional properties.  

Main Group Chemistry Basic Concept: Periodic Trends, Atoms, Molecules. 
and Bioinorganic Structure, Bonding and Reactivity of polyatomic 
Chemistry  molecules. Synthesis and properties of compounds of 

s- and p-block elements. 

Metal ions in biological systems and Medicine, Iron 
storage and Transport, Oxygen transport, Biological 
Redox processes, Metallo-Enzymes.  

Catalysis  Catalysis: Introductory Concept, Homogeneous and 
Heterogeneous Catalysis: Industrially important 
reactions, catalytic concept of energy and 
environmental  

Environmental Environmental Remediation, Soil Chemistry, Water 
Chemistry  Chemistry, Chemical Sensors, Analytical Chemistry  

Laboratory and Hands- Synthesis Techniques for complexes and solids, 
on  Characterization methods, spectroscopic and analytical 

techniques  

 

 

 

Contents 
 

6 
 



 Index 
1 Organic Chemistry Core Courses and Laboratory 

1. Organic Reactions and Mechanism 
2. Physical organic Chemistry 
3. Organic Synthesis 
4. Organic Chemistry Laboratory 

2 Organic Chemistry Elective Courses 
1. Isolation and Synthesis of Natural Products 
2. Spectroscopic Determination of Organic Compounds 
3. Stereochemistry of Organic Compounds 
4. Frontiers in Organic Chemistry 
5. Heterocyclic Chemistry 
6. Polymer Chemistry 

3 Inorganic Chemistry Core Courses and Laboratory 
1. Main Group and Bioinorganic Chemistry 
2. Transition Metal and Organometallic Chemistry 
3. Solid State and Material Chemistry 
4. Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory 

4 Inorganic Chemistry Elective Courses 
1. Catalysis of Energy 
2. Nanomaterials and Nanodevices 
3. Compounds of p-block Elements and Applications 
4. Advanced Materials Design 
5. Characterization Techniques in Inorganic Chemistry 
6. Advanced Catalysis 
7. Water Chemistry 
8. Sustainable Catalytic Systems 
9. Frontiers in Organometallic Catalysis 

5 Physical Chemistry Core Courses and Laboratory 
1. Quantum Chemistry and Spectroscopy 
2. Molecular Thermodynamics and Chemical Kinetics 
3. Theory and Applications of Spectroscopic Techniques 
4. Physical Chemistry Laboratory 
5. Computational Chemistry Laboratory 

6 Physical Chemistry Elective Courses 
1. Numerical Methods and Group Theory 
2. Chemical Binding 
3. Principles of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance 
4. Molecular Dynamics Simulations 
5. Solid State NMR Methods for Materials 
6. Group Theory and Molecular Spectroscopy 
7. Modern Electronic Structure Theory 
8. Chemical Reaction Dynamics 
9. Biophysical Techniques: Theory and Applications 
10.Stochastic problems in Biophysics 
11.Polymer Dynamics 
12.Statistical Mechanics and Molecular Simulations 
13.Advanced Electrochemistry and Applications 

7 Hands on-1 
Hands on-2 

 
 

 

 

7 
 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Organic Chemistry 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

Title Organic Reactions and Mechanisms  Number CYL6XX0 

8 
 



Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. To give students a better insight into the mechanism of diverse set of organic reactions 
2. To broaden their knowledge in fundamental organic chemistry with regard to efficiency 

and selectivity of organic reactions. 
 

Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. The students are expected to be able to draw mechanisms for complex reactions 
2. Understand and predict the orbital interactions involved in organic reactions  

 
Contents  
Introduction: reaction mechanism and its need, methods of determination of reaction 
mechanism, concerted versus stepwise processes, transition states and intermediates, 
early and late transition states, crossover experiments and examples, molecular orbital 
interaction of common functional groups (7 lectures) 
Acids and bases: the pKa scale and its interpretation, pKa‟s of common acids; specific and 
general acid and base catalysis (3 lectures) 
Classification of reactions: introduction to substitution, elimination and addition reactions, 
aromaticity and aromatic substitution reactions (9 lectures) 
Stereochemistry: basics of Stereochemistry, stereochemistry of aliphatic compounds, 
conformational analysis of acyclic and cyclic compounds, (6 lectures)  
Selectivity: chemoselectivity, regioselctivity, and stereoselectivity (4 lectures) 
Radical Chemistry: Basics of radicals, radical initiators, radical halogenation of alkanes, 
radical name reactions (6 lectures) 
Rearrangements and migrations: cationic rearrangements, carbanionic rearrangements, 
carbene/carbenoid based rearrangements (7 lectures) 

 
Textbooks  
1. Sykes,P., (2013), A Guidebook to Mechanism in Organic Chemistry, 6th Edition, 

Longman 
2. Clayden,J., Greeves,N., and Warren,S., (2012), Organic Chemistry, 2nd Edition, Oxford 
3. Carey,F.A., and Sundberg,R.J., (2007) Advanced Organic Chemistry, Part A: Structure 

and Mechanisms, 4th Edition, Plenum 
 
Reference Books  
1. Gossman,R.B., (2008), The Art of Writing Reasonable Organic Reaction Mechanism, 
Springer 

 
Self Learning Material  
1.Sunoj,R.B., Organic Reaction Mechanism, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104101005/ 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Title Physical Organic Chemistry Number  CYL6XX0 

9 
 



Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 

Prerequisite     
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. To provide physical concepts of organic chemistry  
2. To provide knowledge in pericyclic and photochemical reactions  

 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Be able to understand the course of organic reactions with regard to physical concepts 

and stereochemical models 
2. Develop an in-depth knowledge with mechanistic understanding in pericyclic and 

photochemical reactions and apply those in the synthesis of organic compounds 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Brief review of basic concepts of inductive effect, Electromeric effect, 
Resonance effect, Hyperconjugation, Captodative Effect (4 lectures) 
Stereoelectronic Effects: Participation of sigma and pi bonds in transition state, Orbital 
symmetry and frontier orbitals, , Hammond‟s Postulate, Hammette Plot, Curtin–Hammett 
principle (6 lectures) 
Stereochemical Models: Cram Model, Felkin-Anh Model, Chelation Model, Zimmerman-
Traxler Model (7 lectures) 
Pericyclic Reactions: Introduction of pericyclic reactions, Classifications, Cycloaddition, 
Electrocyclic, Sigmatropic, Group transfer reactions(15 lectures) 
Photochemistry: Basic principles of photochemistry, Photochemical reaction of cyclic and 
acyclic carbonyl compounds including enones and dienones, photochemistry of alkenes, 
dienes, aromatic compounds (10 lectures) 

 
Textbooks  

1. Anslyn, E. V. and Dougherty, D. A., (2006),Modern Physical Organic Chemistry, 
University Science Books 

2. Singh, J. and Singh, J., (2012), Photochemistry and Pericyclic Reactions, 3rd Edition. 
New Age  
 

Reference Books 
1. Smith, M. B., (2016), March‟s Advanced Organic Chemistry, 7th Edition. Wiley  
2. Carey, F. A. and Sundberg, R. J., (2007), Advanced Organic Chemistry Part A: 

Structure and Mechanisms, 5th Edition. Springer 
3. Carey, F. A. and Sundberg, R. J. (2007), Advanced Organic Chemistry Part B: Reactions 

and Synthesis, 5th Edition. Springer 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Singh, N.D. P., Organic Chemistry and Pericyclic Reactions, NPTEL Course material, 

Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
http://www.nptel.ac.in/courses/ 104105071/ 

 

 

 

 

 

Title Organic Synthesis Number CYL6XX0 

10 
 



Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. To provide an understanding of diverse chemical reactions and their application in 

synthesis 
2. To provide knowledge of key aspects of retrosynthesis of simple-to-complex organic 

molecules. 
 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Acquire the knowledge and skills required to strategize and plan organic synthesis,   
2. Develop an understanding of total synthesis of organic molecules.  

 
Contents  
Introduction: name reactions, functional group interconversions, transition metal 
catalyzed cross-coupling reactions, oxidations and reductions in organic synthesis (25 
lectures) 
Carbon-carbon bond formation: application of carbanions in organic synthesis, alkylation 
of enolates, enamines and hydrazones, alkylation of heteroatom stabilized anions, 
organometallic reagents and their application in synthesis (7 lectures) 
Strategy and design of organic synthesis: scope and brief history of organic synthesis, 
synthetic strategy, concepts of synthetic equivalents and Umpolung, retrosynthetic 
analysis, linear and convergent synthesis, synthesis of 3-membered, 4-membered, 5 
membered and 6-membered ring compounds (10 lectures) 

 
Text books  
1. Warren,S., and Wyatt.P., (2008), Organic Synthesis: The Disconnection Approach, 2nd 

Edition, Wiley-VCH 
2.  Nicolaou,K.C., Sorensen,E.J., (1996), Classics in Total Synthesis: Targets, Strategies 

and Methods, 1st Edition, Wiley-VCH 
3.  Carey,F.A., Sundberg,R.J., (2007), Advanced Organic Chemistry, Part B: Reactions and 

Synthesis, 5th Edition, Plenum 
 
Reference Books  
1. Clayden,J., Greeves,N., and Warren,S., (2012) Organic Chemistry, 2nd Ed., Oxford 
2. Carruthers, W., (1989), Some Modern Methods in Organic Synthesis, Cambridge  

 
Self Learning Material  
1. Punniyamurthy,T., Principles of Organic Synthesis, NPTEL Course Material, Department 

of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati,  
http://www.nptel.ac.in/courses/104103022/ 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

  Organic Chemistry Laboratory Number CYP6XX0 

 Title 

11 
 



Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 0–0–3[1.5] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. Give students a practical understanding of the theoretical phenomenons. 
2. Provide an exposure to the laboratory techniques for the purification and isolation of organic 
compounds 
 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Learn basic experimental techniques in organic chemistry 
2. Be able to carry out simple synthetic organic transformations and isolate the reaction 
products  
 

Contents  
Extraction: separation of an acidic, a basic and a neutral substance 
Thin Layer Chromatography (TLC): extraction and TLC of spinach pigments  
Hands on Reactions and Purifications by Column Chromatography: Wittig olefination, Henry 
reaction (Nitro-Aldol reaction), Grignard reaction etc. 
Distillation: Separation of compounds based on boiling point 
Elimination Reaction: Dehydration of methylcyclohexanols to methylcyclohexene 
Cycloaddition: The Diels-Alder reaction of a conjugated diene either in eucalyptus oil or other 
dienophiles 
Aromatic Substitution: The Friedel-Crafts acylation of ferrocene 
Functional Group Interconversion: Reduction and oxidation of organic compounds 
Drug Synthesis: Synthesis of Aspirin from Salicylic Acid 
Green Chemistry: A Solvent-Free Aldol Condensation  
 

Textbook  
1. Vogel, A. I., Textbook of Practical Organic Chemistry, Pearson 
 

Reference Books  
1. Ault, A., Techniques and Experiments for Organic Chemistry, University Science Books 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12 
 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Electives in Organic 
Chemistry 

 

 

 

 
  

 

  

13 
 



 

Title Isolation and Synthesis of Natural Products Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Give students a brief history of natural products, their isolation and synthetic studies. 
2. Students will learn about multiple synthetic approaches to natural products including 
synthetic drugs. 
3. Students should understand the complete process of total synthesis of natural products and 
effort required to this end. 

 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand advanced retrosynthetic principles (e.g. key disconnection, chiral pool starting 
materials, reactive functional group) and apply in the synthesis including stereochemical 
aspects  
2. Understand key principles behind enantio- and diastereoselectivity, and develop skills to 
predict and interpret stereochemical outcome of reactions. 
3. Learn method development and their application in the total synthesis of natural products in 
an economical way. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Types of natural products - classification - terpenoids, steroids, alkaloids, natural 
pigments, carbohydrates etc. (3 lectures) 
Isolation: Isolation technique with examples and preliminary identification of natural products. 
(2 lectures) 
Retrosynthesis and synthetic routes: Logical retrosynthetic disconnection, method 
developments and applications in the total synthesis of natural products. (8 lectures) 
Recapitulation of stereochemical concepts: stereoselective and stereospecific reactions, 
prochirality, Chemo-, regio-, diastereo- and enantio-controlled approaches; chirality transfer, 
asymmetric inductions; chiral pools, chiral auxiliaries, chiral catalysts. (6 lectures) 
Terpenoids : Classification, structure, chemistry and biogenesis; Steroids : Sterols and bile 
acids, estrogens, androgens, gestogens and adrenocortical hormones; Alkaloids (5 lectures) 
Characteristic reactions, general methods of degradation, structure and chemistry of some 
well-known alkaloids; Natural Pigments: Flavones, flavanones, isoflavones, xanthones, 
quinones, pterins, chlorophyll and haemin; and Carbohydrates. (8 lectures) 
Synthesis of biologically active Natural products: Strychnine (Overmann Syn.), Fredrikamycin 
A(Norman and Coxan), Cephalosporin (Woodward), Estrone, Mifepristone (Vollard), Taxol, 
Tubulysin, Epothilone, Structure determination of Natural products: Arteannuin B, Hardwickiic 
acid, and Ajmaline, stereoselective synthesis of Ibuprofen, crixivan, propranol. (10 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1.Ernest L. Eliel., (1982), Asymmetric Reactions and Processes in Chemistry 
2.Iwao Ojima., (1993), Catalytic Asymmetric Synthesis: 2nd Ed. 
3.J. Clayden, N. Greeves, S. Warren and P. Wothers., (2012), Organic Chemistry 
Reference Books  
1. S. W. Pelletier., (1970), Chemistry of the Alkaloids 
2. C. W.Shoppee., (1964), Chemistry of the Steroids, 2nd edition 
3.K. Nakanishi, T. Goto, S.Ito, S. Najori and S. Nozoe., (1974), Natural products Chemistry, 
Vol. 1 and 2, Academic Press 
Self Learning Material  
1.http://www.wou.edu/chemistry/courses/online-chemistry-textbooks/ch105-consumer-
chemistry/ch105-chapter-6-hydrocarbons/ 

 

  

14 
 



 

Title Spectroscopic Determination of Course No. CYL7XX0 
Organic Compounds 

Department Chemistry Structure (L-T-P-C) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc./PhD (CY) Program Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. To teach basic aspects of spectroscopic methods, important analytical tools in academic 
research, chemical and pharmaceutical industries for structural characterization of organic 
molecules. 
2. Elucidation of structures of organic compounds using in-depth analysis of different 
spectroscopic data. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Ability to determine the structures of known/unknown organic molecules utilizing several 
spectroscopic techniques mentioned in the content. 
 
Contents 
Infrared Spectroscopy: Introduction to IR spectroscopy, Modes of stretching and bending, 
stretching frequencies of different organic functional groups, Effects of structural and 
conformational environment (3 lectures) 
Mass Spectrometry: Principles of mass spectrometry, Different ionization techniques (EI, CI, ESI 
etc.), GC-MS, HRMS, LC-MS and MS-MS techniques, Fragmentation and rearrangement of 
different classes of organic molecules, Isotope effects, Identification of known/unknown organic 
compounds (6 lectures) 
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy: Chemical shifts of different organic functional 
groups in 1H and 13C NMR, origin and interpretation of coupling constant, introduction to the 
principle and interpretation of DEPT, COSY, NOESY, NOE techniques, Structural elucidation of 
organic compounds (15 lectures) 
Ultraviolet-Visible Spectroscopy: Studies on conjugated and extended conjugated systems, 
analysis and interpretation of UV-Visible spectroscopic data, Application in mechanistic studies 
(3 lectures) 
Identification and Mechanistic Studies: Application of all above techniques in the structural 
elucidation of unknown organic compounds and investigation of organic reaction mechanisms 
(15 lectures)  

 
Text Books 
1. Donald L. Pavia, Gary M. Lampman, George S. Kriz, James A. Vyvyan: Introduction to 

Spectroscopy, 4th Edition, Brookes Cole, 2008. 
2. Robert M. Silverstein, Francis X. Webster, David Kiemle: Spectrometric identification of 

organic compounds, 7th Edition, Wiley, 2005. 
 

Reference Books 
1. Harald Gunther: NMR spectroscopy, Basic principles, concepts, and applications in 

chemistry, 2nd Ed., Wiley, 2001 (reprint) 
2. Timothy Claridge: High Resolution NMR Techniques in Organic Chemistry, 2nd Ed. Elsevier, 

2009 
3. Edmond de Hoffmann, Vincent Stroobant: Mass Spectrometry, Principles and applications, 

3rd Edition, Wiley, 2007 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104103071/26 
 
 

 

15 
 



Title Stereochemistry of Organic Compounds Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for MSc/PhD (CY) Program Type Elective 
Prerequisite     
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Provide understanding of representing stereochemical structures of organic molecules.  
2. Provide knowledge of designing synthetic routes to compounds containing one or more 

stereogenic centers and enantioselective syntheses.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand stereochemical nomenclature, classification of objects with regard to 

symmetry, desymmetrizations, stereochemical discrimination, separation of 
stereoisomers, and principles for stereoselective synthesis  

2. Learn about the key aspects of modern asymmetric synthesis, especially the origin of 
stereoselectivity and to be able to draw plausible TS to predict enantiofacial selectivity.  

 
Contents  
Introduction: Configuration, conformation, determination of structure, symmetry elements, 
Newman, Saw Horse, Zig-Zag and Fischer Projections, absolute stereochemistry (10 
lectures)  
Properties of Stereoisomers: Stereoisomer discrimination, nature of racemates, properties of 
racemates and their enantiomer components (3 lectures) 
Separation of Stereoisomers: Resolution, Crystallization, Chemical separation of enantiomers 
and diastereomers (3 lectures) 
Prostereoisomerism, Prochirality: Homotopic and heterotopic ligands, hetrotopicity and NMR, 
prochirality and centers (4 lectures) 
Conformation of Acyclic and cyclic Molecules: Conformation of Acyclic molecule, Physical and 
spectral properties of diastereomers and conformers, Conformational aspects of various ring 
size compound, stereochemistry of fused and bridged compounds (10 lectures)  
Stereoselective Synthesis: Convergent Synthesis, Distereoselective synthesis, 
Enantioselective synthesis and double stero-differentations (8 lectures) 
Chiroptical Properties: Optical activity, Anisotropic Refraction, Circular dichroism, application 
of optical activity, separation of stereoisomers by chiral HPLC (4 lectures)   

 
Textbooks  
1. Nasipuri, D., (2011), Stereochemistry of Organic Compounds, 3rd Edition, New Age 
2. Kalsi, P. S., (2017), Stereochemistry Conformation and Mechanism, 9th Edition, New Age  

 
References Books 
1. Gupta, S. S., (2017), Basic Stereochemistry of Organic Molecules, 1st Edition, Oxford 

University Press 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Basak, A, Stereochemistry, NPTEL Course Material, Stereochemistry, Department of 

Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104105086/ 

 

 

 

 

 

16 
 



 
Title Frontiers  in Organic Chemistry Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc./PhD (CY) Program Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Give an in-depth exposure to the latest advances in organic synthesis 
2. Inculcating in students a research-oriented approach towards solving synthetic organic 

chemistry problems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Advance their knowledge in strategizing and synthesis of complex organic compounds 
2. Systematically read, understand and interpret the research reported in journals 
3. Develop skills of scientific presentations and interpersonal skills  
 
Contents 
Protecting Group: Selectivity and requirement of protecting groups, protecting groups and 
their deprotection (5 lectures) 

Advanced Radical Chemistry: Radical substitution reactions, coupling reactions, radical 
mediated cyclizations, addition reaction involving radicals, radical chain reactions (5 
lectures) 

Cycloaddition Reactions: 1,3-dipolar cycloadditions, higher order cycloadditions, asymmetric 
cycloadditions. (5 lectures) 

Advanced Enolate Chemistry: Diastereoselective aldol reactions, Evan‟s chiral auxiliary, 
Ender‟s chiral auxiliary, diastereofacial selectivity, asymmetric aldol reactions, 
Organocatalyzed aldol reactions (7 lectures) 

Total synthesis of complex molecules: total synthesis of penicillin, estrone, sparteine, 
prostaglandins, synthesis of important pharmaceuticals (12 lectures) 

C-H functionalization and C-H activation: Transition metal free reactions, Pd, Cu, Rh  

catalyzed C-H activation reactions, remote C-H functionalization and activation reactions (8 
lectures) 

 

Text books 

1. Carriera, E.M., and Kvaerno,L., (2009), Classics in Stereoselective synthesis, Wiley-VCH 
2. Kurti,L., Czako,B., (2005), Strategic Applications of Named Reactions in Organic 

Synthesis, Elsevier 
3. Carey,F.A., Sundberg,R.J., (2007), Advanced Organic Chemistry, Part B: Reactions and 

Synthesis, 5th Edition, Plenum 

 

Reference books  
1. Hudlicky,T., and Reed,J.W., (2007) The Way of Synthesis, Wiley-VCH 
2. Nicolaou,K.C., and Snyder,S.A., (2003), Classics in Total Synthesis-II: Further Targets, 

Strategies, Methods, Wiley-VCH 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Punniyamurthy,T., Catalytic Asymmetric Synthesis, NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104103067/ 

 
 
  

17 
 



 
Title Heterocyclic Chemistry  Course No. CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry Structure (L-T-P:C) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc./PhD (CY) Program Status Elective 
Pre-requisite  

 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Provide insight into the fundamental reactivity and synthesis of heterocycles, and 
2. Broaden their knowledge in the field of heterocyclic chemistry with regard to its 

application in the synthesis of natural products and pharmaceuticals. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will be able to:  
1. Understand the basic heterocyclic principles and apply different types of organic 

reactions in the synthesis of small heterocyclic compounds. 
2. Learn the applications of modern organic synthetic tools in the efficient synthesis of   

heterocycles. 
3. Design and propose routes for the synthesis of natural products and pharmaceuticals 

based on heterocycles. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Importance of heterocyclic compounds, Nomenclature of heterocyclic ring 
systems (3 lectures) 

Three-membered Heterocycles: Structure, reactivity and synthesis of Oxirane, Thiirane 
and Aziridine (3 lectures) 

Four-membered Heterocycles: Structure, reactivity and synthesis of four membered 
Heterocycles such as Oxetane, Thietane and Azetine (3 lectures) 

Five-membered Heterocycles: Structure, reactivity and synthesis of five membered 
Heterocycles such as Pyrrole and pyrrolidine, Thiophene and tetrahydrothiophene, Furan 
and tetrahydrofuran, chemistry of Pyrazole, Imidazole, Oxazole, Thiazole (10 lectures) 

Six-membered Heterocycles: Structure, reactivity and synthesis of Six membered 
Heterocycles: Pyridine and Piperidine, pyran and Tetrahydropyran, pyridones, Pyridine-N-
oxides (10 lectures) 

Polycyclic heterocycles: Structure, reactivity and synthesis of Indole, Quinoline and 
Isoquinoline, Coumarins and Chromones, benzimidazole and benzoxazole (5 lectures)  

Natural Products and Drugs: Synthesis of selected heterocyclic natural products, 
synthesis of important pharmaceuticals containing heterocycles (5 lectures)  

Modern Methods: Synthesis of heterocycles using modern sustainable methods (3 
lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. J. A. Joule and K. Mills, Heterocyclic Chemistry, 5th Ed., Wiley, 2010. 
 
Reference Books 
1. R. K. Bansal, Heterocyclic Chemistry, 5th Ed., New Age International Private Limited, 

2017. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. NPTEL Lectures : Heterocyclic Chemistry- http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104105034/ 

 
 

 

 

 

18 
 



Title Polymer Chemistry Number CY7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    

 

Objectives 
1.  To give students an introduction to polymer world and plastics technology.  
2.  Students will learn the differences between the polymers and their industrial applications.  
3. Students should be aware of the synthetic and environmental risk as well as complete 

process and effort required to this end. 
 

Learning Outcomes  
The student should be able to 

● 1.   Understand the general structure of polymers properties of polymers in solution. 
● 2.   Compare the mechanical properties of polymers based on their structures. 
● 3.   Understand industrial application of polymers. 

4.   Assess risks during chemical synthesis of polymer material. 
 

Contents 
Introduction to polymers; classifications of polymers (2 lectures), chain versus step growth 

process, determination of molecular weight of polymers and their distribution; ATRP (atom 
transfer radical polymerization), Ziegler-Natta and ring opening metathesis (8 lectures) 

     polymerizations: living polymerization, polymer microstructure; physical properties of 
polymers; network formation of macromolecules; postpolymerization modification. (8 
lectures)  

     Functional Polymeric Materials: organic/inorganic hybrid materials, porous polymers, 
biodegradable polymers, conducting polymers, smart materials, intelligent gels and 
coordination polymerization, systematic of synthetic polymers and biopolymers (8 lectures) 

     Polymer chemistry: Polymerization, kinetics, structure and decomposition; Polymers in 
solution: thermodynamics, phase equilibrium, diffusion, viscosity, polyelectrolytes and gels. 
(8 lectures) 

     Polymer synthesis in laboratory and characterization. (2 lectures) , Industrial polymerization 
processes. (4 lectures) 

 

Textbook  
1. P. C. Painter and M. M. Coleman: Fundamentals of Polymer Science, 2. ed., together with 

the problem sets. 
2. Brydson's Plastics Materials, (1993), Eighth edition, J. A. Brydson's, edited by M Gilbert. 

 

Reference Books  

1.  Polymer Chemistry by Charles E. Carraher, sixth edition.  
2.  The Chemistry of Polymers by John W. Nicholson, 3rd edition, RSC publishing. 
 

Self Learning Material  

1.Prof. Dibakar Dhara, IIT Kharagpur https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104105039/ 
 

 

 

 

 

19 
 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Inorganic Chemistry 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

20 
 



 

Title Main Group and Bioinorganic Chemistry Number CYL6XX0 

Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    

 

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Give better insight into chemistry of main group elements and bioinorganic chemistry 
2. Provide broad knowledge about properties and applications of compounds of main group 

elements and metal ions essential in biological systems. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Appreciate chemistry of elements essential in biological systems. 
2. To understand structure and bonding concepts in chemistry of s- and p-block elements 

and systematic understanding of their chemical reactivity  
Contents  
Chemistry of main group elements: VSEPR and Point group symmetry, Synthesis, structure 
and bonding in polyhedral boranes and carboranes, Wade‟s Rules, electron count, Isolobal 
analogy. B-N, P-N, S-N unit containing compounds. Compounds of Silicon, Zeolites. 
Hydrides, halides, oxides, nitrides of s- and p- block elements.  Allotropes of Carbon. 
Chemistry of halogens and Noble gases, Acid-base concept, Chemistry of S-block elements. 
Organometallic compounds of main group elements. (15 Lectures) 
Spectroscopic Characterization: NMR to study fluxionality and dynamic behavior in 
solution.(2 Lectures) 
Applications of main group compounds: Frustrated Lewis pairs and small molecule 
activation,Synthetic uses of main group complexes, Oxidizing/reducing agents. Precursors 
for materials deposition. Deposition of thin films of materials, with a strong focus on 
Chemical Vapour Deposition (CVD) and ALD.  (9 Lectures) 
PET and SPECT imaging: Overview of the development of radio-labelled p-block complexes 
for applications in PET and SPECT imaging (2 Lectures) 
Bioinorganic Chemistry: Transition metals in biology - their occurrence and function, active-
site structure, Metalloenzymes; O2 binding properties of heme (hemoglobin and myoglobin) 
and non-heme proteins hemocyanin & hemerythrin), co-operativity effect, Bohr Effect; 
representative synthetic models of heme and nonheme systems. Electron transfer proteins - 
active site structure and functions of ferredoxin, rubredoxin and cytochromes, and their 
comparisons. Metals in medicine. (12 Lectures) 
Textbooks  
1. Huheey, J. E., (2008), Inorganic Chemistry, 4th edition, Pearson 
2. Housecroft, C. E., and Sharpe, A. G., (2012), Inorganic Chemistry, 4th Edition, Pearson 
3. Miessler G. L., (2014), Inorganic Chemistry, 4th edition, Pearson 

Reference Books 
1. S. J. Lippard (1994) Principles of Bioinorganic Chemistry, University Science Books.  
2. Norman, N. C., (2014), Periodicity and the p-Block Elements, Oxford Primer Nos. 51,2nd 

Edition, Oxford University Press  
3. Atkins, P. (2010) Inorganic Chemistry, 5th Edition, Oxford University Press 

Self Learning Material  
1. Balakrishna, M. S., Chemistry of Main Group Elements, NPTEL Course Material, 

Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117101105/  

2. Ray, D., Bioinorganic Chemistry, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemistry, 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104105031/ 

 
 
 

21 
 



 Title Transition Metal and Number CYL6XX0 
Organometallic Chemistry  

Department Chemistry Structure L-T-P[C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type  Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. To provide students with an overview of transition metal chemistry which form a 

foundation for students pursuing further studies in chemistry 
2. To provide students fundamental of organometallic compounds and their practical 

applications. 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the properties and reactivities of selected transition metal complexes with 

their structure and bonding 
 2.  Utilize the principles of transition metal coordination complexes in understanding      
      reactivity and properties of organometallic compounds 
 
Contents 
Coordination Compounds: Survey of various ligands, coordination, thermodynamic stability, 
Isomerism, Irving-William series, chelate and macrocyclic effect. (5 Lectures) 
Bonding in Coordination Complexes:VBT, CFT and MOT, Crystal Field Stabilization Energies 
and its applications, High and low spin complex, Jahn-Teller theorem. (8 Lectures) 
Reaction mechanismsin Coordination complexes - substitution reactions in complexes, trans 
effect and its influence, water exchange, anation and base hydrolysis, stereochemistry, 
inner and outer sphere electron transfer mechanism (4 Lectures) 
Spectroscopic properties:Color of the complexes, Selection rules. Splitting of the free ion 
energy levels in Octahedral and Tetrahedral complexes. Term Symbol, Orgel, and Tanabe-
Sugano diagrams. (6 Lectures) 
Magnetic Properties: Origin of Magnetic moment,Effect of orbital contributions.(2 Lectures) 
Bonding and properties of organometallic compounds:  Ligands (carbonyl, olefins, 
phosphine, hydride, alkyls, carbines, carbenes). Compounds with carbonyl, olefins, effective 
atomic number (EAN) rule. Classification of ligands-sigma, pi-donor, pi-acceptor.(7 
Lectures) 
Bonding in organometallics: sigma and pi-back bonding, synthesis of organometallic 
compounds. Characterization by FTIR. (3 Lectures) 
Organometallic Reaction and catalysis: Oxidative addition, reductive elimination, CO 
insertion and migration reactions. Applications of Organometallic compounds in 
homogeneous catalysis – isomerization, hydrogenation reaction, hydroformylation, 
Monsanto acetic acid synthesis, C-C coupling reactions, polymerization and metathesis. (6 
Lectures) 
Text Books 
1. Weller, (2014), Inorganic Chemistry, 6th Edition, Oxford University Press 
2. Huheey, J. E. (2006), Inorganic chemistry: principles of structure and reactivity, 4th 

Edition, Pearson  
3. Crabtree, R. H. The Organometallic Chemistry of the Transition Metals, Wiley, 1998 

 

 
Reference Books 

1. Kettle, S.F.A., (2010), Physical Inorganic Chemistry, A Coordination Chemistry 
Approach, Springer 

2. Housecroft, C and Sharpe, A. G. (2012) Inorganic Chemistry, 4th Edition, Pearson 
 

Self Learning Material 
1. Ray, D Coordination Chemistry, NPTEL course material, Department of Chemistry, 

Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104105033/ 
2. Samuelson, A.G., Introduction to Organometallic Chemistry, NPTEL Course Material, 

Department of Inorganic and Physical Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104108062/ 

 
 

 

22 
 



Title Solid State and Material Chemistry Number CYL6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. To provide an overview of the relationships between molecular or solid state structures 

and material properties.  
2. To provide an interdisciplinary understanding of solid state chemistry which aims to 

provide an understanding of how molecular structure affects the properties of 
materials.  

 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. The student will obtain required knowledge for understanding material science 

problems and structure of solids.  
2. Insight into electronic structure of crystals and compare it with the electronic structure 

of nanomaterials, chemical-physical fundamentals as well as basic method of 
characterisation of solids. 

 
Contents 
Structure of Solids: Crystalline and Amorphous, diffraction techniques, symmetry and point 
groups, packing in solids, classification, lattice energy, bonding, structures: NaCl, TiO2, 
ZnS, wurtzite, Perovskite, covalent and ionic solids.(10 Lectures) 
Crystal defects: non-stoichiometry, cluster, diffusion, Fick‟s Law and Kirkendall effect, 
Identification of defects using microscopic techniques.(6 Lectures) 
Solid state reaction:Chemical and Physical Methods of preparation, reactivity of solids, 
decomposition mechanism, single crystal growth and thin film deposition. (10 Lectures) 
Band theory:Intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors, insulators,density of states, Dielectrics, 
Hall effect, Thomson, Peltier and Seeback effects.(Lectures 8) 
Properties of Solids: Magnetic, Electrical and Optical properties, Different type of 
Magnetism and Superconductivity, Introduction to nanomaterials and properties.(Lectures 
6) 
 
Textbooks 
1. B. D. Cullity and S. R. Stock, (2014), Elements of X-ray diffraction, 3rd edition, Pearson  
2. West, A.R., (2015), Solid State Chemistry and Its Applications, 2nd edition, John Wiley 

& Sons 
3. Lesley E Smart and Elaine E Moore, (2005), Solid State Chemistry: An Introduction, 3rd 

Edition, Taylor and Francis 
 
Reference Books 
1. Cheetham, A.K. and Day, P., (1997), Solid State Chemistry Compounds, 2nd Edition, 

Clarendon Press, Oxford  
2. Harry R. Allcock, (2008), Introduction to Materials Chemistry, 1st Edition, Wiley. 
3. C N R Rao and J Gopalkrishnan, (2004) New Directions in Solid State Chemistry, 2nd 

Edition, Cambridge. 
 
Self Learning Material 

1. Subramaniam, A, Structure of Materials, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Materials Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104014/16 

 
 

 

 

 

23 
 



 Title Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory Number CYP6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5] 
Offered for M.Sc.(CY) Program Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Emphasize on the different techniques of reaction set-up (air-sensitive, moisture-sensitive 
etc. involved in the synthesis, isolation and purification of inorganic compounds.  
2. Expose students to various spectroscopic identification and characterization techniques. 

 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the basic principles behind the synthesis and properties of inorganic 
compounds. 
2. Plan and Conduct experiments for synthesis and characterizing inorganic compounds. 
 
Contents 
Laboratory Experiments: 

Non-metal complex: Synthesis and characterization of bispyridine iodide nitrate; Solid phase  
synthesis and characterization of trans-bis glycinato copper(II); Synthesis of penta  
amminechlorocobalt(III)chloride and its spectroscopic properties; Influence of ligand field 
tetragonality on the ground state spin of nickel(II) complexes with NH3 and H2O and  
ethylene diamine; Preparation and magnetic properties of FeIII(acac) complex; Preparation 
of TiO2 from Titanium Isopropoxide; Preparation and Characterization of Hydroxyapatite;  
Luminescent Ruthenium Complexes. Synthesis of RuHCl(CO)(PPh3)3 complex and its 
characterisation by 1H, 31P NMR and IR spectroscopy 

 
Text Books 
1. G. S. Girolami, T. B. Rauchfuss, R. J. Angelici Synthesis and Technique in Inorganic 
Chemistry, University Science Books, 3rd Ed, 1999. 
2.Elias, A. J., A Collection of Interesting General Chemistry Experiments, Universities 
Press(India) Pvt. Ltd., 2002 
 
Reference Books 
1. J. Derek Woolins, Inorganic Experiments, 3rd Edition, Wiley, 2010. 
2. Roesky, H. W.; Muckel, K., Chemical Curiosities: spectacular experiments and inspired 
quotes, VCH, 1996. 
3. Handouts prepared for the laboratory experiments: collections from various literature 
sources (ACS Chemical Education) 
 
Self Learning Material 
John Dolhun. 5.301 Chemistry Laboratory Techniques. January IAP 2012. Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology: MIT Open Courseware, https://ocw.mit.edu. 

 

 

 

 

 
24 

 



 

 

 

 

 

Elective  

of Inorganic Chemistry  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

25 
 



Title Catalysis for Energy  Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for MSc./PhD (CY) Program  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    

 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. To give an overview about defining a roadmap for the role of catalysis in energy 

production 
2. Relate catalysis with fuel cells, hydrogen production and storage, methane storage and 

industrial catalysis 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the role and the possibilities of catalysis in the production of new energy 

carriers and in the utilization of different energy sources.  
2. to go beyond conventional application identifying new developments that may lead to 

breakthroughs in the production of alternative energy. 
 

Contents 
Catalysis: Introduction to heterogeneous catalysis, including models of surface reactivity, 
surface equilibria, kinetics of surface reactions, electronic and geometrical effects in 
heterogeneous catalysis.(Lectures 14) 
Catalytic reactions and application: Trends in reactivity, catalyst structure and composition, 
electro-catalysis and photo-catalysis.(Lectures 12) 
Selected applications and challenges in energy transformations: fuel cells, hydrogen 
production, OER and HER reactions, CO2 oxidation, methane and hydrogen storage and 
industrial catalysis. (Lecture 14) 
 
Textbooks  
1. Hanefeld, U, Lefferts, L. (2018) Catalysis: An Integrated Textbook for Students, 1st 

Edition, Wiley  
 

Reference Books:  
1. Okada, Tatsuhiro, Kaneko, Masao, (2009), Molecular Catalysts for Energy Conversion 

Springer. 
2. Guczi, László, Erdôhelyi, András, Catalysis for Alternative Energy Generation, Springer. 
3. Pierluigi Barbaro, Claudio Bianchini, Catalysis for Sustainable Energy Production, Wiley 
 
Self Learning Material 
1.  Xile Hu, Angamuthu, R and Bera, J. K., Catalysis for Energy Storage, GIAN Course 

material, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LvTfsIAI-VE 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

26 
 



Title Nanomaterials and Nanodevices Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 2-0-1 [3] 
Offered for MSc/PhD (CY) Program  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Underlying scientific basis for the behavior of nanomaterials 
2. Methods of synthesis, fabrication and characterization of nanomaterials 
3. Scope of nanomaterials and potential translation as products 

 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Able to describe the basic science behind the properties of materials at the nanometer 

scale 
2. Learn principles behind advanced experimental techniques for studying nanomaterials 
3. Systematically solve scientific problems related specifically to Nano technological 

materials 
 
Contents 
Concepts, Definitions and Examples:Nanoscale processes, nanosystems, nanostructures, 
important nanomaterials such as clusters, nanocrystals, nanotubes and nanowires. (2 
Lectures) 
Size-dependent properties: Quantum confinement, Bandgap, Surface effects in 
nanosystems. Optical, mechanical, electronic and magnetic properties along with surface 
reactivity.(6 Lectures) 
Synthesis of nanomaterials: Top-down and bottom-up, soft versus hard methods, chemical 
and physical methods, hybrid methods for synthesis of nanomaterials.(6 Lectures) 
Experimental methods for the study of nanomaterials:Electron microscopes (SEM and TEM), 
scanning probe microscope (AFM and STM), X- ray photoelectron spectroscopy, BET surface 
area, electroanalytical techniques and miscellaneous methods (6 Lectures) 
Nanolithography for Nanodevices: Concepts and methods; fabrication of devices, clean room 
practices, optical, electron, ion- beam lithography, soft lithography, micromolding, 
nanoimprint lithography. (6 Lectures) 
Applications:Translating nanomaterials and nanodevices as commercial products.(4 
lectures)  
Laboratory Experiments 
 Synthesis of metal nanoparticles, Particle size analysis by UV Visible spectroscopy, 
synthesis of semiconducting ZnO nanoparticles, quantum dots, optical band gap analysis by 
emission spectrum, SEM imaging, AFM analysis, patterning by Photo/Soft 
Lithography,graphene synthesis and surface property analysis  

 
Text Books 
1. Pradeep, T., (2012), Textbook of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Mc Graw Hill 
2. C. N. R. Rao, P. J. Thomas and G. U. Kulkarni (2007)Nanocrystals: Synthesis, 

Properties and Applications,Springer.   
Reference Books 
1. Nalwa, H. S., (2004), Encyclopedia of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Edition 

American Scientific Publishers, Los Angeles 
2. Rao, C.N.R. and Govindaraj, A., (2005), Nanotubes and nanowires, RSC Publishing 
3. C. N. R. Rao, P. J. Thomas and G. U. Kulkarni (2007)Nanocrystals: Synthesis, 

Properties and Applications,Springer.  
Self Learning Material 
1. Subramaniam, A., Balani, K. Nanostructures and Nanomaterials: Characterization and 

Properties, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Materials Science & Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/118104008/;  

 
 
 
 

27 
 



Title Compounds of p-block elements and Number CYL7XX0 
Applications 

Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc./PhD (CY) Program  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. To give better insights into the interesting class of compounds such as rings, clusters, 

polymers and low valent complexes of the main-group elements. 
2. To learn about the synthesis, structure and properties of inorganic heterocyclic and 

homocyclic rings. 
3. To discuss about structure, properties and reactivity of clusters and cages of main group 

elements. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Appreciate the interesting class of compounds such as rings, clusters and polymers of 

main group metal compounds. 
2. Gain deeper insights into the synthesis and reactivity of novel main group compounds. 
3. Understand structure-property relationships and applications of inorganic, organometallic 

polymers and low valent compounds. 
 

Contents  
Inorganic Rings: Synthesis, structure and reactivity of compounds containing heterocyclic 
rings of elements such as Phosphorus, Boron, Silicon, Tin and Aluminum. Structure and 
reactivity of compounds containing homocyclic rings of germanium, boron, silicon, 
aluminum. Synthesis and properties of inorganic macrocycles. (10 Lectures) 
Clusters: Clusters and Cages of Main Group Elements, Boron Hydrides and Carboranes. 
Homo and Heteropolyatomic Anions of the Post-Transition Elements. (8 Lectures) 
Inorganic polymers: Synthesis, structure-property relationships and applications of 
Polysiloxanes, Polyphosphazenes, polysilanes and organometallic polymers. (10 Lectures) 
Chemistry of Low valent compounds: Low valent compounds of main group elements, 
Recent advances in NHCs and their analogous group 13, 14 and 15 compounds. (6 Lectures) 
Applications: Main group element containing rings, clusters and polymers as single source 
precursors for nanomaterials. Low valent compounds in small molecule activation. (9 
Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. Chivers, T. and Manners, I., (2009), Inorganic Rings and Polymers of the p-Block 
Elements, 1st Edition, Royal Society of Chemistry  
2. P. Atkins, (2008), Inorganic Chemistry, Indian Edition, 4th Ed, Oxford University Press 
 

References 
1. H. R. Allcock, (2003), Chemistry and Applications of Polyphosphazenes, Wiley 
2. V. Chandrasekhar, (2005), Inorganic and Organometallic Polymers, Springer-Verlag 
3. M. Driess, (2004), Molecular Clusters of the Main Group Elements, Wiley-VCH 
 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Balakrishna, M. S., Chemistry of Main Group Elements, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117101105/ 
 
 

 

 

28 
 



Title Advanced Materials Design Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry  L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc./PhD (CY) Program Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide a comprehensive overview of synthesis and characterization of bulk materials, 

nanoparticles, nanocomposites and hierarchical materials with nanoscale features. 
2. cover the fundamental scientific principles controlling assembly of nanostructured  
3. materials; synthesis, characterization tools; new properties at the nanoscale, and 
      existing and emerging applications of nanomaterials 

 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand a variety of different methods for synthesizing materials. 
2. Evaluate the synthesis methods against each other and be able to make assessments as 

to what form the final products will be. 
3. Should be able to assess appropriate methods for the synthesis of stable nanomaterials 

 

Contents  
Introduction to Materials Chemistry: Structure, property and their relationship with materials 
performance (3 Lectures) 
Semiconducting Materials Chemistry: Semiconductor Devices, Phase Change Materials in 
Memory Technology, Thermoelectric, Superconductors, Topological Insulators, Emerging 
materials in the device industry such as graphene and 2D materials.(8 Lectures) 
Optical/Opto-electronic Materials: Light Emitting Diodes, Photosensors, Photovoltaics (3 
Lectures) 
Structural & Basic Applied Materials: Structural Materials, Amorphous Materials, Smart & 
Responsive Materials, Bio-inspired materials (8 Lectures) 
Thermal Materials Application: Thermochromics (2 Lectures) 
Energy Materials: Batteries and Supercapacitors, Fuel Cells,Hydrogen generation,Hydorgen 
storage, Carbon capture and sequestration (8 Lectures) 
Student Seminars on Selected Topics from above 
 

Textbooks  
1. Fahlman, Bradley, (2011), Materials Chemistry, 3rd Edition, Springer 
2. P. Yang (2003), The Chemistry of Nanostructured Materials, 1st Edition, World Scientific 

Publishing Company, Singapore 
 

Reference Books  
1. G. Cao, (2004), Nanostructures and Nanomaterials: Synthesis, Properties and 

Applications, Imperial College Press: Hackensack, NJ 
2. Goldstein, J.I. et al. (1992), Scanning Electron Microscopy and X-Ray Microanalysis: A 

Textbook for Biologists, Materials Scientists and Geologists, 2nd Edition, Springer, US.  
 

Self Learning Material 
1. Qureshi, M. Chemistry of Materials, NPTEL Course Material, Indian Institute of Technology 

Guwahati, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104103019/2 
 

 

  

29 
 



Course Title Characterization Techniques in  Course No. CYL7XX0 

Inorganic Chemistry  
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1.To provide an introduction to various characterization methods that are applied to 
inorganic chemical systems. 

 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Appreciate different important characterization methods that are applied to inorganic 

chemical systems. 
2. Analyze the chemical and physical characterization of molecular (solution and solid-

state) inorganic chemical systems. 
 

Contents 
Fundamental aspects of characterisation methods in inorganic chemistry. 
Molecular Symmetry: Point group analysis of simple inorganic compounds. Infrared and 
Raman spectroscopy of simple inorganic molecules; predicting number of active modes of 
vibrations, analysis of representative spectra of metal complexes with various functional 
groups. (6 Lectures) 
Electronic spectroscopy: electronic absorption and emission spectroscopy (4 Lectures) 
Multinuclear NMR: Use of 1H and 13C NMR to study  fluxionality and dynamics in inorganic 
and organometallic chemical systems;  NMR spectral analyses of B, Al, Si, F,  and P 
containing compounds. Inorganic and Organometallic compounds of some other NMR active 
nuclei will also be discussed. (11 Lectures) 
EPR: Elementary aspects of Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy of 
inorganic compounds- g-values, hyperfine and super hyperfine coupling constants; selected 
applications in inorganic chemistry. (5 Lectures) 
Mass spectrometry: basic principles, ionization techniques, isotope abundance, molecular 
ion; illustrative examples from supramolecules, inorganic/coordination and organometallic 
compounds. (5 Lectures) 
X-ray and Photoelectron Spectroscopy: Electron microscopy and energy dispersive analysis 
of X-rays (5 Lectures) 
Cyclic voltammetry: Introduction to cyclic voltammetry and discussion on cyclic 
voltammogram of some representative examples. (5 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. R. S. Drago, Physical Methods for Chemists, 2nd Edition, Saunders, 1992. 
 
Reference Books 
1. M. Weller,  Inorganic Chemistry, 6th Edition, Oxford University Press, 2014. 
2. J. E. Huheey, Inorganic Chemistry, Principles of Structure and Reactivity, 4th Edition, 
Pearson, 2006. 
3. F. A. Cotton, Advanced Inorganic Chemistry, 6th Edition, Wiley, 2007. 

 
Self Learning Material 
1. Alagarsamy P, Characterization of Materials NPTEL Course Material, Department of      
 Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115103030/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 



Course Title  Advance Catalysis  Course No.  CYL7XX0 

Department Chemistry  L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  MSc/PhD (CY) Program Type  Elective 

Pre-requisite     

 

Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge of key aspects of organometallic chemistry including the different binding 

modes of organic ligands, variation in oxidation states and electron counts.  
2. Provide an understanding of the fundamental types of organometallic reaction, such as 

insertion, oxidative-addition  
 

Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1.  understand some fundamental organometallic transformations that underpin the catalytic 

formation of carbon-containing species.   
2. understand basic knowledge, skills and experience useful to those students progressing into 

the chemical industry and research in the area of catalysis 
 

Course Contents  
       Fundamentals of Catalysis :Definition, reaction coordinate diagram, homogeneous 
catalysis, mechanism, catalytic cycle, fundamental organometallic processes, ligand 
substitution, oxidative addition, migratory insertion, transmetallation, reductive elimination, 
transition metals versus homogeneous catalysts, turnover limiting step, features of a catalytic 
process, Effective Atomic Number Rule (18-electron-rule).(8 Lectures) 

      Stereochemistry and Selectivity: Concepts and Definitions,  Isomers, constitution, 
configuration enantiomers and diastereomers, conformation, stereochemical terms-a primer, 
optical activity, methods for determination of enantiomeric excess-chiral stationary phase 
(CSP) GC and CSP-HPLC  and NMR. (8 Lectures) 

       Consequences of diastereoisomerism: (i) resolution of enantiomers via formation of 
diastereomeric salts, (ii) resolution via chromatography (GC and HPLC), (iii) identification of 
absolute stereochemistry, (iv) determination of enantiomeric ratio (er), or enantiomeric excess 
(ee), NMR shift reagents, (iv) diastereoselective synthesis, (v) kinetic resolution, examples and 
(vi) enantioselective synthesis, examples. (7 Lectures)  

      Hammond Postulate: Kinetic and Thermodynamic Control.  Kinetic and thermodynamic 
control, use of energy diagrams, examples: DBr addition to 1,3-butadiene, enolate formation 
from 2-methylcyclohexanone, Hammond postulate, examples: Markovnikov regioselectivity of 
HX addition to monosubstituted alkenes, Orientation in electrophilic aromatic substitution 
reactions (7 Lectures)    

      Asymmetric Catalysis Using Organometallic Reagents: Hammond Postulate and Curtin 
Hammett Concepts, Methods and Origin of Selectivity. CurtinHammett principle,reactivity of 
conformations pyrolytic elimination, Felkin-Anh model for predicting acyclic stereoselection, 
[Rh(L*)]+ X– , L* =chiral ligand)]-catalyzed asymmetric hydrogenation of dehydroamino-acids 
for the synthesis of enantiopure alpha-amino-acids Diastereomeric intermediates and origin of 
selectivity, Pd(0)-catalyzed allylation of stabilized carbon nucleophiles and Rh Catalyzed 
hydrogenation two classical examples with different reaction profiles (10 Lectures) 

 

Text Books 
1. 1. F A Cotton, G. Wilkinson, C A Murillo and M Bochmann, Advanced Inorganic Chemistry, 6th 

ed, 1999, WileyInterscience  
2. 2.C Elschenbroich and A Salzer, Organometallics, VCH Publishers, 1st ed 1989, 2nd ed 1993.  
3. 3. R H Crabtree, The Organometallic Chemistry of the Transition Metals, Wiley, 1998  

Reference Books 
4. 1. Ashutosh Tiwari and Salam Titinchi, Advanced Catalytic Materials, Wiley, 2015 

Self Learning Material 
5. 1. NREL Learning,  Biofuels and Bioproducts through Catalysis, 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=srCZqrC4dEo 
6.  

31 
 



Course Title  Water Chemistry   Course No.  CYL7XX0 
Department  Chemistry  L-T-P [C] 2–0–1 [3] 
Offered for  BTech/MTech/MSc/PhD(CY) Program  Type  Elective 
Pre-requisite   Consent of Teacher   
 

Objectives  
The instructor will: 
1. Provide the objective of this course is to provide a fundamental and advance 

understanding of the chemical and biochemical processes that are involved in water 
treatment for drinking purposes and treatment of industrial and domestic wastewaters for 
water reuse and discharge to the environment  

2. Provide knowledge of the key chemical processes relevant to research in water chemistry  
 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Perform quantitative and qualitative interpretations for water quality analysis 
2. Apply concepts of chemical equilibrium to solve water related practical problems  
 

Course Contents  

Polar nature of water, Acids and bases, Buffering capacity of water (3 Lectures)  
Equilibrium constant expressions,aqueous system including concentration, activities, activity 
coefficients and pH of equilibrium. (4 Lectures) 
Chemical reaction equation and Arrenhius and Bronsted-Lowry acids and bases (4 Lectures) 
Ionization constant reactions and expressions, Self-Ionization of water, Solubility-product 
expressions (4 Lectures) 
Measuring pH, Filtration, Alkalinity and aqueous titrations (3 Lectures) 
Cycling of water and residence time (3 Lectures)  
Water availability,usage, quality and water treatment methods (5 Lectures)  
Analytical methods for water quality analysis (6 lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments 
Measuring color in water, removing turbidity, acidity determination, alkalinity determination, 
chloride in water, hardness test for water, dissolved oxyzen by winkler‟s method 
 

Reference Books 

1. 1. Sawyer, C., McCarty, P., & Parkin G, Chemistry for Environmental and Engineering Science.  
5th Edition. Toronto: McGraw-Hill, 2003 

2. 2. Mark M. Benjamin, 2015, Water Chemistry, Waveland Press, Second Edition, ISBN 1-4786-
2308-X  
Text Books 

1. 1.Werner Stumm, James J. Morgan, Aquatic Chemistry: Chemical Equilibria and Rates in 
Natural Waters, 3rd Edition, Wiley  

2. 2. Kerry J. Howe, David W. Hand, John C. Crittenden, R. Rhodes Trussell, Principles of Water 
Treatment,  George Tchobanoglous, Wiley  
Self Learning Material 
1. NPTEL Lectures: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/122106030/ 

 
 
 
 

 

 

32 
 



Title Frontiers in Organometallic Catalysis Number CYL7XX0 

Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective  

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

1. To impart advanced knowledge on frontiers of organometallic chemistry.  
2. To teach practical applications of organometallic compounds in homogeneous catalysis 

particularly relevant to industrial applications. 

Learning Outcomes  

1. The learners are expected to gain knowledge of independent thinking in designing, 
characterizing and fine tuning of organometallic complexes suitable for potential catalytic 
transformations. 

2. Learners will be able to delineate mechanistic proposal of catalytic reactions based on the 
available experimental data. 

3. Learners will have an update on current trends and challenges of organometallic chemistry 
towards molecular activation and organic transformations focusing on sustainable 
development. 

Contents  

1.Introduction: Basics of organometallics, 18 e- rule, sigma and pi donor/acceptor ligands 
(5 lectures) 
2. Synthetic, characterization and reactivity strategies of Transition Metal hydrides bearing 
carbonyl, nitrosyl, carbene, phosphine, olefins, and so on as ancillary ligands. Inert bonds 
(C-H, C-C, O-H, N-H) and small molecules (H2, CO, CO2) activation mediated by 
organometallic complexes. (12 lectures) 
3. Definition and concepts of catalysis: Important terminologies in catalysis  
Hydrogenation, dehydrogenation, dehydrogenative coupling reactions, hydrosilylation, 
hydroformylation, hydroamination, hydrocyanation, hydrozirconation, carbonylation, 
Wacker oxidation, Fischer Tropsch synthesis, water gas shift reaction, Olefin 
polymerization, olefin metathesis, Mechanistic pathway interpretation: Kinetic studies, 
Deuterium Kinetic Isotope effect, Rate limiting step, Resting state, Scrambling 
experiments. (13 lectures) 
4. Approaches towards Sustainability using organometallic complexes: Pincer catalysts 
design, Utilization of CO2 and other feed stocks; Sustainable Energy: H2 economy, 
Methanol economy, Liquid organic hydrogen carrier. (6 lectures) 
5.Frustrated Lewis pair Chemistry: Hydroboration, carboboration, small molecule 
activation, catalysis. (5 lectures)   

Textbooks 

1. Crabtree, R. H. The Organometallic Chemistry of the Transition Metals, Wiley, 1998 
2. Gupta, B. D.; Elias, A. J. Basic Organometallic Chemistry: Concepts, Syntheses and 

Applications Paperback, Universities Press; 2nd Edition (May 30, 2013). 
Reference Books  
1. Collman J. P.; Finke R. G.; Norton J. R. Principles & Applications of Organo-transition Metal 

Chemistry, University Science Books 
2. Bhaduri S.; Mukesh, D. Homogeneous Catalysis: Mechanisms and Industrial Applications 
Self Learning Material 
1. Maiti, D. Organometallic Chemistry, NPTEL Course Material, Indian Institute of Technology 

Bombay, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ITfwjQemwMg&list=PLj_Alq7xw30l8iUgacWidP_83A0r
ZqlBR&index=1 

33 
 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Physical Chemistry 

 

 
 

 

 
  

 

 

 

34 
 



Title Quantum Chemistry and Spectroscopy Number CYL6XX0 

Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    

 

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Attempt to provide an advanced level understanding of quantum chemistry 
2. Will show a few applications of quantum mechanics to chemistry  
3. Establish the relation between fundamentals of spectroscopy and quantum chemistry  

 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand quantum mechanics and applications to chemistry problems such as 

minimum energy path search, single point calculation and geometry optimization.  
2. Apply spectroscopic methods as analytical tool in chemistry, biology, material science, 

medicine 
 

Contents  
Fundamentals: Old Quantum theory, Correspondence principle, Bohr-Sommerfeld 
quantization, Wave-particle duality, Stern-Gerlach experiment (9 lectures)   
Mathematical Formalism: Operators, Eigenfunctions and eigenvalues, Operators in quantum 
mechanics, expectation values, Theorems of Quantum Mechanics, Commuting and non-
commuting operators, Angular momentum (10 lectures)  
Exactly Solvable Problems: Time independent and time dependent wave equation, Particle 
confined to infinite and finite potential wells, Harmonic oscillator, Rigid rotor, Hydrogen atom 
(10 lectures)  
Approximation Methods: Variational principle, Perturbation theory, Energy and wave function 
corrections, Born-Oppenheimer approximation (8 lectures)  
Introduction to spectroscopy: Introduction to rotational, vibrational spectroscopy, electronic 
transitions, Frank-Condon principle, vertical transitions – selection rules, parity, symmetry 
and spin selection rule (5 lectures)  
 

Textbooks  
1. Levine, I. N., (1983), Quantum Chemistry, 3rd Edition, Allyn and Bacon  

 

Reference Books  
1. McQuarrie,D. A., (1983), Quantum Mechanics, 2nd Edition, University Science Books  
2. Bernath,P. F., (2005), Spectra of Atoms and Molecules, 2nd Edition, Oxford University 

Press, London 
3. Banwell,C. N., (2010), Fundamentals of Molecular Spectroscopy, 4th Edition, Tata 

McGraw Hill, New Delhi 
 

Self Learning Material 
1. Krishnan, M. S., Introduction to Quantum Chemistry and Molecular Spectroscopy, NPTEL 

Course Material, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106083/ 

 

 

 

35 
 



Title Molecular Thermodynamics and Chemical Number CYL6XX0 

Kinetics 
 

Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 

Objectives  
 The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the connection between microscopic theory and thermodynamics.  
2. Describe how complex phenomena can be transferred into simple models. 

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Predict properties of many-body systems starting from its microscopic  

constituents and their interactions 
2. Connect microscopic theory to chemical reaction 

  
  
CYL6XX1: Thermodynamics [1-0-0] 
thermodynamics laws, state and path functions and their applications; thermodynamic description of 
various types of processes; Maxwell’s relations; spontaneity and equilibria 
Temperature and pressure dependence of thermodynamic quantities; Le Chatelier’s principle (14 
lectures). 
  
CYL6XX2: Statistical Thermodynamics [1-0-0] 
Micro and macro states, canonical, micro canonical and grand canonical ensemble, 
Boltzmann distribution; kinetic theory of gases; partition functions, thermodynamic 
properties from partition functions for model systems; Debye-Huckel theory (14 lectures). 
   

CYL6XX3: Chemical Kinetics [1-0-0] 

Empirical rate laws and temperature dependence; complex reactions; steady state 
approximation, determination of reaction mechanisms  

Mechanism: Theory of reaction rates, activation energy, transition state theory, potential 
energy surface, uni-molecular reaction rate, enzyme kinetics, salt effects (14 lectures). 

Text Books  
1. D. McQuarrie and J. D. Simon, (2014) Molecular Thermodynamics, Viva Books. 
2. D. McQuarrie, (2011) Physical Chemistry, A Molecular Approach, Viva Books.  
 

Self Learning Material  
1. D. McQuarrie, (2000) Statistical Mechanics, University Science Books. 
2. K. J. Laidler, (2013) Chemical Kinetics, Pearson. 

 
Self Learning Material 

1. V.Balakrishnan, Department of Physics, IIT Madras. http://nptel.iitm.ac.in 

2. Leonard Susskind, Statistical Mechanics, Stanford University, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D1RzvXDXyqA&t=901s 

3. De, A. K. Advanced Chemical Thermodynamics and Kinetics, NPTEL Course Material, 
Chemical Sciences, IISER Mohali, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_cy20/ 

 

  

36 
 



 

Title Theory and Applications of Spectroscopic Number CYL6XX0 
Techniques   

Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce to theoretical background of spectroscopic methods along with their 

instrumentation and application.   
2. Enable students to use such methods whenever needed by giving hands on experience 

with available instruments in the institute.  
 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Apply spectroscopic methods as analytical tool in chemistry, biology, material science, 

medicine.  
2. Operate various spectrometers available in the institute. 

 
Contents  
CYL6XX1: Electronic Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
Properties of electromagnetic radiation, interaction of radiation with matter, Stimulated and 
Spontaneous processes, Einstein coefficient, Rabi Oscillation, intensity of spectral line and 
line shape, Fourier Transformation, General understanding of spectroscopic selection rule. 
UV-vis and Fluorescence Spectroscopy: Basic principles, Laws of photochemistry, Jablonski 
diagram, Frank-Condon principle, quantum yield expression and Stern-Volmer equation, 
FRET. (14 lectures) 
CYL6XX2: Infrared and Raman Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
Basic principle; Organic functional group identification through IR spectroscopy, IR and 
Raman activity. (14 lectures) 
CYL6XX3: NMR and EPR Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
NMR Spectroscopy: Basic principle, Zeeman splitting, chemical shift and spin-spin coupling, 
introduction to AB, AX, AMX spin system, 1D 1H and 13C NMR for structure elucidation, 
Polarization transfer methods and NOE. EPR Spectroscopy: basic principle, Electron-nuclear 
hyperfine interaction, theory of first order EPR spectra, analysis of 1st Order spectra, 
example of EPR spectra of organic radicals and transition metal complexes.  (14 lectures) 
 
Textbooks  
1. Gunther, H., (1995), NMR Spectroscopy, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
2. Banwell, C. N., (1994), Fundamentals of Molecular Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Tata 

McGraw-Hill Book Company 
3. Lakowicz, J. R., (2006), Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Springer, 

New York  
 

Reference Books 
1. Bernath, P. F., (2005), Spectra of Atoms and Molecules, 2nd Edition, Oxford University 

Press  
2. Silverstein, R. M. and Webster, F. M., (2010), Spectroscopic Identification of Organic 

Compounds, 6th Edition, Wiley 

Self Learning Material  
1. Mangal Sundar, K.,  Introduction to Quantum Chemistry and Molecular Spectroscopy, 

http:// http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106083 
2. Trivedi, V. and Chaudhary, N., Bioanalytical Techniques and Bioinformatics, Department 

of Biotechnology, http:// http://nptel.ac.in/courses/ 102103044.  
3. Das, R., Principles and Applications of Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectroscopy, 

Department of Chemical Sciences, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106048/2 
 

37 
 



 

Course Title Physical Chemistry Laboratory Course No. CYP6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite   

 

Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Introduction to the different spectroscopic and analytical techniques.  
2. Introduction to the instrumentation and application of these methods.   
3. Enable students to use such methods whenever needed by giving hands on experience 

with available instruments in the institute.  
 

Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Clear understanding of different analytical instruments.  
2. Experimental verification of fundamental concept 
3. Application of spectroscopic techniques as analytical tool in chemistry.  
Course Content 
1. Determination of the pI of an Amino Acid using pHmeter. 
2. Determination of critical micellar concentration by conductometry and calculation of free 

energy of micellization 
3. Determination of Heat Capacity of metals by Dynamic Scanning Calorimeter and 

verification of Dulong and Petit Method 
4. Determination of the ligand-protein binding constant using Fluorescence quenching 

technique 
5. Determination of 1H spin-lattice relaxation time by NMR Inversion Recovery method 
6. Determination of Gibbs free energy of the keto-enol tautomerism by 1H NMR 
7. Determination of bromobenzene surface coverage on silica by FTIR 
8. Study of surface properties (surface energy and surface tension) of various surfaces and 

solutions. 
9. Study of Redox reactions for understanding the reversibility of the reactions using cyclic 

voltammetry 
10. Surface Adsorption Kinetics of Dyes on activated carbon using UV-Visible 

spectroscopy/calorimetry 
 

Text   Text Books 
1. Halpern, A. M.; McBane, G. C. Experimental Physical Chemistry: A laboratory Textbook, 

3rd ed. W. H. Freeman, 2006.  
Reference Books  
Literature papers from ACS Chemical Education 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

38 
 



 

Title Computational Chemistry Laboratory Number CYP6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite CYL6XX0 (Chemical Binding) Or Equivalent    
 
Objectives  
 The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the connection between theory and experiments 
2. Provide the understanding of how complex phenomena can be transferred into simple 

models. 
 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Learn tools and techniques used in computational chemistry. 
2. Develop computational skills related to chemistry. 

 

Contents  
1.Drawing the geometry of a molecule - Read XYZ coordinates - measure bond distances and 
angles (MOLDEN). 
2.Using a fixed nuclear geometry, compute the ground state electronic energy of a molecule 
using Hartree-Fock, MP2, and DFT. 
3.Perform geometry optimization (energy minimization) using different theories. 
4.Compute the vibrational frequencies and differentiate a minimum and a saddle point. 
5.Calculate potential energy profile and intrinsic reaction coordinate of a reaction. 
6.Learn visualizing bulk system using computer (VMD). 
7.Build bonded and non-bonded potential parameters after geometry optimization. 
8.Energy minimization of a bulk system at meso-scale. 

9.Different ensembles, NVT, NPT, NVE. 
 
Text Books  

1. Levine, I. N., (1983), Quantum Chemistry, 3rd Edition, Allyn and Bacon  
2. Molecular Modelling: Principles and Applications, Andrew Leach, 2nd Edition, Pearson. 
3. Daan Frenkel and Berend Smit, (2002) Understanding Molecular Simulation, Academic 

Press. 
 

Reference books  
1. Mark E. Tuckerman, Statistical Mechanics, (2010) Theory and Molecular Simulations, 

Oxford University Press. 
2. Szabo, A.and Ostlund, N.S. (1996), Modern Quantum Chemistry, Dover. 
 

 

 

 

 

 
39 

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

Electives of Physical 
Chemistry 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
40 

 



 

Title Numerical Methods and Group Number CYL6XX0 
Theory 

Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Basic mathematics and numerical techniques required for Chemistry students 
2. Knowledge on error analysis to be used for laboratory courses  
3. Provide the fundamentals of group theory to understand structure, chemical bonding and 

spectroscopy   
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 

1. Ability to analyze data and perform error analysis on the data  
2. Ability to understand and appreciate the mathematical and group theoretical concepts behind 

chemical theories  
 

Contents 
Mathematical Concepts: Vectors and Vector spaces, Operators, Orthogonal and Unitary 
matrices, Diagonalization, Matrix eigenvalue problems, Systems of linear algebraic equations, 
Determinants, Ordinary and partial differential equations, Fourier and Laplace transformation 
(15 lectures)  
Numerical Methods: Errors in Data, Absolute and relative errors, Distribution of Errors, Central 
Limit Theorem, Linear regression and correlation, Interpolation, Roots of Equations, Algorithms 
for Matrix (15 Lectures) 
Group Theory: Symmetry elements and Point Groups, Group postulates and definitions, Group 
multiplication tables, Subgroups and cosets, Symmetry classes and conjugates, Reducible and 
irreducible representations, Representations and character tables, Group theory and quantum 
mechanics, Group theory and chemical bonding, Applications of group theory to structures and 
spectroscopy, Group theory and crystal symmetry (12 Lectures) 
 

Text Books 
1. Kreyszig, E., (2011) Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 9th Ed., Wiley 
2. Cotton, F. A., (2008) Chemical Applications of Group Theory, 3rd Ed., Wiley India 

 

Reference Books: 
1.Louis, L., (1991) A Practical Guide to Data Analysis for Physical Science students, Cambridge 
University Press 
2. Louis, L., (2005) Mathematics for Science Students, Cambridge University Press 
3. Arfken, W. and Harris, P. (2012) Mathematical Methods for Physicists, 7th Ed., Elsevier 
 

Self Learning Material: 
1. Iyengar, S. R. K., Numerical Methods and Computation, NPTEL course material, Department 
of Mathematics, IIT Delhi 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=88ys5ZIolSg&list=PL6E313980EF23CA6E 
2. Chandra, M., Chemical Applications of Symmetry and Group Theory, NPTEL course material, 
Department of Chemistry, IIT Kanpur 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Av9f25sqLG0&list=PLj_Alq7xw30knZPTpa9whzqiSn_RZHG
WP 

 

 

 

41 
 



Title Chemical Binding  Number CYL6XX0 

Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Pre-requisite Basic Quantum Chemistry    

 

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide high level understanding of a chemical bond using quantum mechanics. 
2. Describe knowledge of modern techniques in quantum chemistry. 
 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1.  Use modern quantum chemistry techniques to solve fundamental problems related to basic 

chemistry. 
2.  Understand a chemical bond. 
 

Contents  
CYL6XX1: Multi-electron systems [1-0-0] 
 

Electronic structure: Variation theory, perturbation theory, electron spin, He atom, Pauli 
exclusion principle, Slater determinant (14 lectures) 
 

CYL6XX2: Electronic structure theory [2-0-0] 
 

Electronic structure of diatomic molecules: Born Oppenheimer approximation, Atomic units, 
H +

2  ion, H2 molecule, VB theory, MO theory, Semi-empirical methods (13 lectures) 
Wave function based theory: Hartree-Fock theory, Electron correlation, Self-consistent field 
wave function, Moller-Plesset theory, Coupled cluster formulation (12 lectures) 

Density functional theory (DFT):  Principles of density functional theory, commercial 
functionals and applications (3 lectures)   

 

Textbook 
1. Levine, I. N., (2000) Quantum Chemistry, Pearson education. 
2. Lowe, J. P., (1995) Elementary Quantum Chemistry, Academic Press. 
 

Reference Books 
1.  Szabo, A. and Ostlund, N. S., (1996) Modern Quantum Chemistry, Dover. 
 

Self Learning Material 
1. K. Mangala Sunder, Introduction to Chemistry & Quantum Chemical Methods, NPTEL course 
material, Department of Chemistry, IIT Madras, http://nptel.iitm.ac.in 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 



Title Principles of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance  Number CYL6XX0 

Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    

 

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduction to Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy with an emphasis on 

the basic principle along with instrumentation and application.  
2. Enable students to understand the design of NMR experiments and analyze NMR 

spectrum to extract information of interest.   
3. Introduce to NMR experiments by giving hands on experience on the instrument 

available in the institute.  
 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand the theoretical background of solution state NMR.  
2. Apply NMR experimental methods as an analytical tool in chemistry, biology, material 

science, medicine for structure and dynamic studies of molecules.   
3. Understand instrumentation of NMR spectrometer available in the institute. 

 
Contents  
Introduction to NMR: Spin density operator, concept of density matrix, Liouville-Von-
Neuman equation, the nuclear spin Hamiltonian- gyromagnetic ratio –energy level Diagrams-
Zeeman Splitting. (12 lectures) 
Introduction to NMR parameters: Chemical shifts and couplings, longitudinal and transverse 
relaxation process – Redfield relaxation theory – paramagnetic relaxation, correlation times 
and relaxation times. (10 lectures) 
Introduction to 1D Fourier Transformspectroscopy: Bloch equation in the rotating frame – 
pulse sequence design – 1D 1H and 13C NMR for structure elucidation – measurement of 
relaxation rates, Nuclear Overhauser effect, effect of chemical exchange. (10 lectures) 
Introduction to 2D NMR, correlation spectroscopy: common pulse sequences –homo and 
hetero nuclear correlation spectroscopy –examples of COSY, TOCSY and NOESY – Application 
–chemical structure –biological processes – molecular dynamics etc.  
aboratory demonstration of standard NMR experiments. (10 lectures) 
 

Textbook  
1. Farrar, T.C. and Becker, E.D., (1971), Pulse and Fourier Transform NMR, 1st Edition, 

Academic Press 
2. Gunther, H., (1995), NMR Spectroscopy, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
3. Derome, A. E., (1987), Modern NMR Techniques for Chemistry Research, 1st Edition, 

Pergamon Press  
 

Reference Books 
1. Ernst, R. R., Bodenhausen, G. and Wokaun, A., (1987), Principles of Nuclear Magnetic 

Resonance in One and Two Dimension, 2nd Edition, Clarendon Press  
2. Claridge, T. D. W., (1999), High Resolution NMR Techniques in Organic Chemistry, 1st 

Edition, Elsevier 
 

Self Learning Material  
1. Atreya, H. S., Principles and Applications of NMR Spectroscopy, NPTEL Course Material, 

NMR Research Center, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_ge07 

 

 

43 
 



Title Molecular Dynamics Simulations Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry  L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 

1. Provide high level understanding of the connection between dynamics of molecules 
and their macroscopic properties 

2. Describe modern techniques in molecular simulations using high speed computers 
 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Use modern simulation techniques to solve fundamental problems related to 
interdisciplinary areas of Physics, Chemistry and Biology 
2. Find explanations for phenomena related to soft condensed matter 
 

Contents  
Basics of Molecular Dynamics: Theoretical foundation of classical statistical mechanics, 
Boltzmann‟s relation, harmonic oscillator and harmonic baths, introduction to molecular 
dynamics, Algorithms for equations of motions (10 lectures), 
 

Various ensembles: Purpose of ensembles in simulations, canonical ensembles, isobaric 
ensembles, grand canonical ensembles, applications of ensembles, thermostat,  Barostat (10 
lectures) 
Advance Techniques: Free energy perturbation theory, Thermodynamic Integration, 
Jarzynski‟s equality, Umbrella Sampling (10 lectures) 
Applications:  How to set up Membrane system, protein and small biological molecules (12 
lectures)  
 

Textbooks  
1. D. Frenkel and B. Smith, (2002), Understanding Molecular Dynamics Simulations,1st 

Edition, Academic Press  
2. Mark Tuckermann, (2010), Statistical Mechanics and Molecular Simulations, 1st Edition, 

Oxford University  
 

Self Learning Material  
1. M. P. Allen and T. J. Tildesley., (1993), Computer Simulations of liquids, 1st Edition, 

Oxford Science Publications  
 

Preparatory Course Material 
1. Banerjee, T. Molecular simulations, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemical 

Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/103103036/ 

2. Tembe, B.L., Computational Chemistry and Classical Molecular Dynamics, NPTEL Course 
Material, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_cy13 

 

 

 
 
 
 

44 
 



Course Title Solid State NMR Methods for Materials Number  CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The course will enable 
1. Introduction to essential techniques of solid state NMR 
2. Introduction to various spin interactions important in solid state e.g., chemical shift 

anisotropy, dipolar coupling etc.  
3. To enable students to understand the design of solid state NMR experiments and 

analyze NMR spectrum to extract information on solid state structure and dynamics.  
 

Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Have basic understanding of the theoretical background of solid state NMR. 
2. Application of solid state NMR in the field of materials relevant in medicine, renewable 

energy, polymers etc. 
3. Understanding of various solid state methods that can be applied to characterize 

materials of interest.  
 

Contents  
Introduction to various nuclear spins other than 1H relevant for solid state materials: 
quadrupolar nuclei, concept of chemical shift anisotropy (CSA), scalar coupling, dipolar 
coupling and quadrupolar interactions, relation between shielding tensor and electronic 
structure, powder averaging. (8 lectures) 
Introduction to nuclear spin Hamiltonian relevant in solid state: cross polarization, isotropic 
mixing Hamiltonian, solid state echo sequence, Homo and heteronuclear decoupling, concept 
of spin diffusion and polarization transfer, concept of Nuclear Quadrupole Resonance (NQR) 
(10 lectures) 
Introduction to NMR techniques: powder line shape, determination of anisotropy, Magic 
Angle Spinning (MAS), generation of spinning sideband patterns, sideband modulation, 
molecular structure and dynamics determination by probing ssb manifolds, Techniques for 
measuring CSA and orientation of shielding tensor, measurement of homo and 
heteronuclear dipolar coupling, correlation experiments. (10 lectures) 
Introduction to molecular dynamics: powder line shape analysis-relaxation time studies-2D 
rotor synchronization and Exchange Spectroscopy (EXSY). (10 lectures) 
Application of solid state NMR: in polymers, nanomaterials, drugs, narcotics, explosives etc., 
recent advances in 1D solid state methods for dynamics, application of NQR. (4 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Duer, J. M., (2005), Introduction to Solid State NMR, Wiley. 
Reference Books 

1. Ernst, R. R., Bodenhausen, G., Wokaun, A., (1987), Principles of Nuclear Magnetic 
Resonance in One and Two Dimension, Clarendon Press, Oxford.  

2. Bakhmutov, V. I., (2011), Solid-State NMR in Materials Science- Principles and 
Applications, CRC Press. 

Self Learning Material 
1. Atreya, H. S., Principles and Application of NMR spectroscopy, NMR Research Center, 

IISC Bangalore, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_ge07/preview 
2. Molugu, T. R., Lee, S., Brown, M. F., Concepts and Methods of Solid State NMR 

Spectroscopy Applied to Biomembranes, 2017, Chem. Rev., 117, 12087-12132 
3. Dybowski, C., Bai, S., Solid State NMR Spectroscopy, 2008, Anal. Chem., 80, 4295-

4300.  
 

  

45 
 



 

Title Group Theory and Molecular Spectroscopy Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for MSc./Ph.D. (CY) Program Type Elective  
Prerequisite    

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide basic and advanced group theoretical concepts and their applications in bonding,    

spectroscopy, and solid state chemistry. 
 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Analyze and understand the concept of point group and symmetry associated with 

molecular frameworks  
2. Apply the knowledge of group theory to understand bonding, and structure in chemical 

species.   
 

Contents  
Introduction: The nature of the problem, symmetry operations, elements and operators, 
groups and group theory- general definitions, defining, deriving and recognizing point groups, 
subgroups and cosets, classes, group multiplication table (10 Lectures) 
Theory of group representations: The great orthogonality theorem, character of a 
representation, reducible and irreducible representations, construction of character tables and 
physical interpretation, application of representation theory in quantum mechanics, direct-
product groups (10 Lectures) 
Applications to Chemical Bonding and spectroscopy: Molecular orbitals, applications to valence 
bond theory and molecular orbital theory, bonding in homonuclear diatomic molecules of 
transition metal, molecular orbitals in complex compounds, Huckel molecular orbital theory, 
application of group theory to UV-Visible, IR and Raman spectroscopy (14 Lectures) 
Group theory and crystal symmetry: Crystal systems and classes, translational and space 
groups, symmorphic and nonsymmorphic space groups, applications of space group, factor 
group (8 Lectures) 
 

Textbooks 
 
1. Cotton, F. A., (1990) Chemical Applications of Group Theory, 3rd edition Wiley-Interscience 
2. Vincent, A., (2013) Molecular Symmetry and Group Theory: A Programmed Introduction to 
Chemical Applications, 2nd Edition Wiley 
 
Reference Books 
1.Engel, T. and Reid, P., (2012), Quantum Chemistry and Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Pearson  

 

Self Learning Material  
1.Chandra, M., Chemical Applications of Symmetry and Group theory, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_ch02/preview 

 

 

 

 

 

46 
 



 

Title Modern Electronic Structure Theory Number CYL7XX0 

Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–3 [4] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basic Quantum Chemistry    
 

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge of modern electronic structure theories and basic computational 
chemistry techniques and tools to carry out electronic structure calculations and interpret 
experimental spectra 
 

Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Carry out electronic structure calculations and interpret experimental spectra 
2. Write simple computer programs to carry out calculations 

 

Contents  
Review of basics: Linear algebra, numerical techniques, postulates of quantum mechanics, 
Born-Oppenheimer approximation, concept of potential energy surface, variational and 
perturbation approaches (14 lectures)  
Electronic structure theories: Hartree-Fock (HF) and post-HF theories, Moller-Plesset theory, 
density functional theory, coupled cluster theory, electron correlation, configuration 
interaction, excited states, time dependent density functional theory (14 lectures)  
Techniques: Energy minimization, vibrational frequency analysis, symmetry analysis, zero 
point energy calculation, intrinsic reaction coordinate, distinguishing stationary points, 
atomic charges, Mulliken analysis (14 lectures)  
 

Laboratory Experiments 
Electronic structure calculations; Geometry optimization; simple Fortran programming; 
finding intrinsic reaction coordinates; computing potential and free energy profiles   
 

Textbook 
1. Levine, I. N., (2016), Quantum Chemistry, 7th Edition, Pearson Education 
2. McQuarrie, D. A., (2016), Quantum Chemistry, 2nd Edition, Viva Books 
3. Szabo, A., (1996), Modern Quantum Chemistry, Dover Publications 
 
Reference Books 
1. Jensen, F., (2017), Introduction to Computational Chemistry, 3rd Edition, Wiley-Blackwell 
2.  Cramer, C. J., (2004), Essentials of Computational Chemistry, 2nd Edition, Wiley-
Blackwell 
 

Self Learning Course Material 
1. Simons, J.: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z5cq7JpsG8I 

 

 

 

 

 

47 
 



 

Title Chemical Reaction Dynamics Number CYL7XX0 

Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basic Quantum Chemistry    
 

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide introduction to reaction dynamics in the gas phase and many advanced 

concepts in scattering theory.  
2. Compare experimental data with dynamics simulations.  

 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Interpret experimental data in terms of classical and quantum scattering theory 
2. Design and perform advanced dynamics simulations.  

 

Contents  
Reactive collisions: Fundamentals, Potential energy surfaces, Crossed molecular beams, 
state-to-state cross sections, Classical and quantum scattering process (15 lectures)  
Rate theories: Kinetic theory of gases, Transition state theory (TST), Rice-Ramsperger-
Kassel-Marcus (RRKM) theory, Microcanonical and thermal rate constants 
Gas phase dynamics: Photodissociation, energy transfer dynamics, intramolecular vibrational 
energy flow, mode selective chemistry with Lasers (20 lectures) 
Condensed phase dynamics: Solvation, Diffusion, Kramer-Grote-Hynes model, Correlation 
functions (7 lectures)  
 

Textbooks  
1. R. D. Levine, (2009) Molecular Reaction Dynamics, Reprint Edition, Cambridge 

University Press, USA.  
 

Reference Books  
1. T. Baer and W. L. Hase, (1996), Unimolecular Reaction Dynamics: Theory and 

Experiments, Oxford University Press, USA  
2. A. Nitzan, (2006), Chemical Dynamics in Condensed Phases, Oxford University Press, 

USA  
 

Preparatory Course Material 
1. Halder, M., Reaction Dynamics, NPTEL lectures,  Department of Chemistry, Indian 

Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104105041/31 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

48 
 



Title Biophysical Techniques: Theory and Number CYL3XX0 
Applications 

Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc/PhD Program, B.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite    

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce basic knowledge of a few biophysical methods and their application in the 

interdisciplinary area of chemistry and biology.  
2. To have a greater understanding of the underlying theory of these methods and their 

practical applications in the laboratories.  
 

Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand the underlying principle of different biophysical methods.  
2. To be able to use important biophysical methods to decipher problems relevant to 

biology.  
3. Better understand the structure-function activity of biomolecules. 
 

Course Content 
Spectroscopic methods: Concepts of spectral transition and analysis of spectrum, Application 
of UV-VIS spectroscopy in protein folding kinetics, Advance topics in fluorescence such as 
anisotropy, resonance energy transfer and real time fluorescence; principle of Circular 
dichroism, optical rotatory dispersion methods and applications, Principle of Surface Plasmon 
Resonance spectroscopy, SPR optical phenomenon, application of SPR in ligand-protein 
interaction. (15 lectures) 
Magnetic Resonance based methods: Principles of NMR and EPR, Concept of relaxation and 
polarization transfer, application of 1D and 2D NMR methods in biomolecules, EPR 
transitions, identification of metal centers in biomolecules, spin labelling and motions of side 
chains. (15 lectures) 
Calorimetric techniques: Principles and applications of Isothermal Titration Calorimetry, 
Differential Scanning Calorimetry, applications in biomolecules. (7 lectures) 
Centrifugation Techniques: Concepts and fundamentals of centrifugation. Ultracentrifugation 
techniques in biology. (5 lectures ) 

Textbook  
1. Cox, M.M, Nelson, D.L., Lehninger (2009) Principles of Biochemistry,  6th Edition, W.H. 

Freeman & Co, 
2. Gunther, H., (1995), NMR Spectroscopy, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
3. Circular Dichroism – Principles and Application, (2000) Edited by Brova, N., Nakanishi, 

K., Woody, R. W., 2nd Ed., Wiley.  
 

Reference Books 
1. Claridge, T. D. W., (1999), High Resolution NMR Techniques in Organic Chemistry, 1st 

Edition, Elsevier 
2. Stryer, L., Berg, J.M., Tymoczko, J.L., (2012) Biochemistry, W.H.Freeman & Co Ltd  
3. Lakowicz, J. R., (2006), Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Springer, 

New York  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. NPTEL lectures: https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc19_cy07/preview 
2. Sharma, K. A., Analytical Technologies in Biotechnology, Dept. of Biotechnology, IIT 

Roorkee, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc19_cy07/preview 

 
 
 

49 
 



Course Title Stochastic Problems in Biophysics Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective    
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
The course will enable: 
1. To understand applications of fundamental probability methods to a wide variety of 

problems related to biophysics. 
2. To show the mathematical literature on this subject 
3. To understand non-equilibrium statistical mechanics 

 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Ability to translate complex phenomena into simple models  
2. Ability to derive mathematical models for problems related to biophysics 
 
Course Content 
1. Introduction: Historical examples, Joint and conditional Probabilities, Correlation functions 

and Cumulants, Gaussian and Poissonian Probability Distributions (14 lectures)  
2. Markov Processes: Chapman-Kolmogorov Equation, Examples of Markov Processes  (10 

lectures) 
3. Brownian Motion: Basic assumptions, Langevin Equation, Fokker-Planck Equation, Master 

Equations and Jump Processes, Linear Response Theory  (18 lectures) 
  
Text Books 
1. Landau and Lifshitz, Statistical Physics, Elsevier, 2005 
2. David Chandler, Introduction to Modern Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, 1987 

Self Learning Materials 
1. C. W. Gardiner, Handbook of Stochastic Methods for Physics, Chemistry and Natural 

Sciences, Springer-Verlag, 1983 
2. Edited and Introduced by John Stachel, Einstein’s Miraculous Year, Princeton University 

Press, 1998. 
3. S. Chandrashekhar, Reviews of Modern Physics, vol 15, No 1, APS 

 

Preparatory Course Material 
Prof. V. Balakrishnan, IIT Madras: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qNmB1qNjZ0k 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

50 
 



Course Title Polymer Dynamics Course No. CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P[C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type  Elective    
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 

1. 1. To understand basic principles and theory of  modern macromolecules 
2. 2. To  understand the analogy to other branches of science at a more fundamental level 

 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Ability to realize that polymers are essential ingredients in biological machinery 
2. Ability to do advanced calculations more modestly 
 
Course Content 
Ideal Chain : Freely joint chain, Flexibility of a polymer chain, Gaussian Chain, Ideal chain as a 
random walk, Ideal polymer by an external force, Flory Calculation (12 lectures)  
Polymer chains with volume interactions and Melts : Models with volume interactions, ideal 
melts, chains in solvents (10 lectures)  
Dynamics: Rouse model, Zimm Model,  Real polymer coil, Reptation model (10 lectures) 
Biopolymers:Properties, Primary structure, Secondary structure, Helix-coil transition (10 
lectures) 
  
Text Books 
1. M. Doi and S. F. Edwards, The Theory of Polymer Dynamics, Oxford Science Publications, 

1990. 

Self Learning Materials 
1. Alexander Yu. Grosberg and Alexei R. Khokhlov,  Statistical Physics of Macromolecules,  AIP 

Press, 1994 
2. Pierre-Gilles de Gennes, Scaling Concepts in Polymer Physics, Cornell University Press, 

1979 

Preparatory Course material 
1. George Phillies lectures a series of graduate classes, based on his book "Phenomenology of 

Polymer Solution Dynamics" Cambridge University Press, 2011. 
2. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mVzrYKkeJzE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

51 
 



Course Title Statistical Mechanics and Molecular Course No. CYL7XX0 
Simulations 

Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. To understand the complex soft matter system that bridges the traditional disciplines of 

physics, chemistry and biology using modern theoretical methodology and high-speed 
computers. 

2. To explore the connections between basic statistical mechanical theories and real world 
applications in studying physical, chemical and biological phenomena. 
 

Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Understanding basic principles of Statistical Mechanics and Molecular Dynamics Simulations. 
2. Mathematical formalism associated with theory and techniques of molecular modelling. 
3. Few real world applications to understand the connections between microscopic and 

macroscopic world. 
 

Course Content 
Statistical basis of thermodynamics:  Introduction to Statistical Methods, Micro and Macro 
states, Ensemble theory (micro-canonical, canonical, isobaric, grand-canonical), Mathematical 
techniques (5 lectures) 
Classical Statistical Mechanics: Partition functions, Thermodynamic functions, Phase space and 
Liouville equation, Distribution functions, Kirkwood integrals (10 lectures).  
(Module 3 of ``Statistical Physics” by Physics department) Fluctuations: Thermodynamic 
fluctuations, Spatial correlations in a fluid, Einstein-Smoluchowski theory of Brownian motion, 
Langevin theory,Fokker-Planck equation, Fluctuation-dissipation theory, Onsager relations (12 
lectures) 
Introduction to Molecular Modeling: Algorithms, Periodic boundary conditions, Interaction 
functions and force fields, Electrostatics, Molecular dynamics in various ensembles (10 lectures) 
Applications:Brownian dynamics simulations, Biological applications for proteins and 
membranes (5 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Mark E Tuckerman, Statistical Mechanics and Molecular Simulations, Oxford University, 

2010 
2. David Chandler, Introduction to Modern Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, 

1987  
Self Learning Material 
1. M. P. Allen and T J Tildesley, Computer Simulations of Liquids, Oxford Science Publications, 

1993 
2. D. A. Mcquarrie, Statistical Mechanics, University Science Books, 2000 
3. D. Frenkel and B. Smit, Understanding Molecular Dynamics Simulations, Academic press, 

2002 
 

Preparatory Course Material 
1. https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mechanical-engineering/2-57-nano-to-macro-transport-

processes-spring-2012/ 
 

 

 

  

52 
 



 

Course Title Advanced Electrochemistry and Number CYL7XX0 
Applications 

Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Pre-requisite  
 
Objectives 
The instructor will 
1. Provide an introductory but thorough background in electrochemistry. 
2. Provide fundamentals of electrochemical systems, electroanalytical techniques and 

advanced applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. describe the difference between equilibrium properties and properties of electrochemical 

systems and apply electrochemical methods for required information. 
2. explain the functioning of electrochemical devices as well as the commonly employed 

underlying electrochemical reactions 
 

 Contents 
Introduction to Electrochemistry: Nernst equation, electrode kinetics, dynamic 
electrochemistry, the Butler-Volmer and Tafel equations. Overpotentials. Kinetically and 
mass transport controlled electrochemical processes. Mass transport by migration, 
convection and diffusion. Conductivity. (Lectures 7) 
Electrochemical Methods: Potentiostatic and galvanostatic electrochemical methods including 
chronoamperometry, coulometry, cyclic voltammetry, chronopotentiometry, ac impedance 
spectroscopy, spectroelectrochemistry and hydrodynamic methods.(Lectures 8)  
Solid state electrochemistry. Ion conducting and electronically conducting polymers; The 
electrochemical double layer. (5 Lectures) 
Surface confined electrochemical processes: The fundamentals of corrosion. Homogeneous 
and heterogeneous electrocatalysis (HER and OER). Electrochemical processes coupled to 
chemical steps. Nanostructured and surface modified electrodes. (8 Lectures) 
Application: Introduction to batteries, fuel cells and electrochemical solar cells. (7 Lectures) 
Electrochemical processes of particular relevance to energy conversion.(5 Lectures) 

 
Text Books 

1. D. I. Antropov, Theoretical Electrochemistry, Mir Publishers, 1972. 
2. J. M. Bockris and A. K. N. Reddy, Modern Electrochemistry, Vol.1 and 2, Plenum Press, 1998. 
3. Industrial Electrochemistry, 2nd ed, Pletcher, Derek/Walsh, Frank C., London: Chapman and 

Hall, 1990 
4. Electrochemistry for Chemists, 2nd ed, Sawyer, Donald T./Sobkowiak, Andrej/Roberts, Julian 

L., New York: John Wiley, 1995 
 
Reference Books 
1. Transient Techniques in Electrochemistry, Macdonald, Digby D., New York: Plenum Press, 

1977  
2. Laboratory Techniques in Electroanalytical Chemistry, (2nd edition) by Peter Kissinger 

and William Heineman (Marcell Dekker) 1996 
 

Preparatory Course Material 
1. NPTEL material: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106105/ 
 

 

 

53 
 



 

 

Course Title Hands On -1 Course No. CYP6XX0 

Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory  
Pre-requisite   

 

Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Provide the students hands-on training using the available characterization tools .  
2. Provide students with the knowledge and skills needed to conduct laboratory research, 

understand instrument design and analyze instrumental results. 
 

Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Clear understanding of different analytical instruments.  
2. Experimental verification of fundamental concept 
3. Application of spectroscopic techniques as analytical tool in chemistry.  

 

Contents 
1. NMR Working principles and instrumentation 
2. Single Crystal X-Ray Diffraction  Working principles and instrumentation 
3. Electroanalytical Methods (Ampereometry, Cyclic Voltametry, EIS spectroscopy etc) 
4. SEM Working principles and instrumentation 
5. AFM Working principles and instrumentation 
6. UV-Vis Working principles and instrumentation 
7. IR Working principles and instrumentation 
8. TGA/DSC Working principles and instrumentation 
9. BET Surface Area Analyser Working principles and instrumentation 
10. PXRD Working principles and instrumentation 
 

Text Books 
1. Halpern, A. M.; McBane, G. C. Experimental Physical Chemistry: A laboratory Text 

Book, 3rd ed. W. H. Freeman, 2006.  
 

 Reference Book:  
1. Literature References from ACS Chemical Education 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

54 
 



 

Course Title Hands on -2 Course No. CYP6XX0 

Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory  
Pre-requisite   

 

Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Provide the students hands-on training using the available characterization tools .  
2. Provide students with the knowledge and skills needed to conduct laboratory research, 

understand instrument design and analyze instrumental results. 
 

Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Have clear understanding of different analytical instruments.  
2. Experimental verification of fundamental concept 
3. Application of spectroscopic techniques as analytical tool in chemistry. 

 

Course Content 
1. Chromatographic Techniques (GC and HPLC) in Organic Analysis 
2. Fluorescence Spectroscopy and its application 
3. Synthesis techniques and laboratory practices  
4. OriginPro Data Analysis and Plotting of graphs 
5. MERCURY and ENCIFER Crystal structure viewing 
6. MATLAB for data analysis: basic plotting techniques; curve fitting; and simple linear 

programming;  
7. Chem Draw for drawing molecular structures 
8. Mathematica for mathematical data handling 
9. Technical communication - presentation, literature search 
10. Scifinder for literature search 
11. Analysis and identification of organic compounds by 1H NMR, Mass spectrometry and IR 
12. Modeling of intermediate and transition state of organic reactions 

 
Text Books: 

1. Halpern, A. M.; McBane, G. C. Experimental Physical Chemistry: A laboratory Text Book, 
3rd ed. W. H. Freeman, 2006. 

 

Reference Book:  
1. Hunt, B. R. et al., A guide to MATLAB: For beginners and experienced user, 2nd Edition, 

University Press, Cambridge, 2006 
2. ChemDraw user guide: http://media.cambridgesoft.com/support/15/ChemDrawHelp.pdf 
3. McMahon, D, A & Topa, D. M., A beginners guide to Mathematica, Chapman & Hall/CRC, 

2006.   
 
 

 

 

55 
 



 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Master of Science (MSc) Program  
in  

Mathematics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

56 
 



 
(1) Introduction: 

The classical mathematics provides foundations for analysis of key principles behind 

modern and emergent technologies, modern mathematics coupled with computational 

capabilities is opening new avenues for further explorations. M.Sc. (Mathematics) 

Program at IIT Jodhpur aims at tapping these opportunities by developing workforce 

specialized in mathematics needed for developing key technologies. The proposed four 

semester program strives to provide balance between analysis and application of 

Mathematics. The compulsory courses provide the basic understanding and foundation of 

mathematics enhancing analytic capabilities of the students. Students can further 

explore their area of interest with program and open elective courses. The project 

component spread over last two semesters provides research exposure to the students 

and provides an opportunity to apply their mathematical skills to solve real-life 

problems. Students are encouraged to undertake research Summer Internships in 

Institute of repute, Industry and R&D organizations. 

 

(2) Objectives of the Program: 

M.Sc. program in Mathematics at IIT Jodhpur is offered with the objective of tapping 

opportunities for nurturing motivated students in the frontline areas and well trained 

workforce for Academia and Industry. The Program also strives to provide a vibrant 

environment to support independent thinking and developing the spirit of team work. 

 
(3) Expected Graduate Attributes: 

(1) Skill set to analyze abstract mathematical structures. 

(2) Understanding about the recent areas in pure and applied mathematics such as 

algebra, analysis, statistics and computation. 

(3) Ability to formulate mathematics from computational aspect.  

(4) Knowledge and capability to develop and apply mathematical models for real life 

problems. 

(5) Skill set to understand the abstraction of mathematical structures. 

(6) Analytical and scientific skill set to pursue higher studies and research in diverse 

areas of mathematics. 

(7) Ability to express ideas in the written and oral formats. 

 

(4) Learning Outcomes: 

(1) Understanding of fundamental aspects of real, complex and functional analysis. 

(2) Basic understanding of linear and abstract algebra. 

(3) Knowledge about basics and use of probability theory, statistics and differential 

equations. 

(4) Skill set to cater computational aspects using programming techniques. 

(5) Basic understanding of symbolic solution tools such as MATLAB or Mathematica. 

(6) Demonstrate skills to communicate scientific ideas and/or application systems.  

57 
 



(7) Acquire project management skills. 

(5) Program Structure: 
 

Cat. Course Course Title L-T-P-Credits Cat. Course Course Title L-T-P- Credits 
Number D Number D 

Semester 1  Semester 2 
C MAL6XX0 Linear 3-0-0- 4  C MAL6XX0 Abstract 3-0-0-1 4 

algebra 1 Algebra 
C MAL6XX0 Real analysis 3-0-0- 4  C MAL5XX0 Complex  3-0-0-1 4 

1 Analysis 
C MAL6XX0 Ordinary 3-0-0- 4  C MAL6XX0 Partial 3-0-0-0 3 

Differential 1 Differential 
equations equations 

C MAL5XX0 Probability 3-0-0- 4  C MAL6XX0 Functional 3-0-0-0 3 
and 1 analysis 
Statistics 

C MAL5XX0 Programming 2-0-2- 3  PE Xxxxx PE1 3-0-0-0 3 
Techniques 0 

      C MA5XX0 Data 1-0-2-0 2 
Structures and 
Algorithms 

Total 19  Total 19 
 

Semester 3  Semester 4 
C MAL6XX0 Topology 3-0-0- 3  PE Xxxxx PE5 3-0-0-0 3 

0 
PE Xxxxx PE2 3-0-0- 3  PE Xxxxx PE6 3-0-0-0 3 

0 
PE Xxxxx PE3 3-0-0- 3  OE Xxxxx OE2 3-0-0-0 3 

0 
PE Xxxxx PE4 3-0-0- 3       

0 
OE Xxxxx OE1 3-0-0- 3       

0 
P MAP7XX0  Project 0-0-0- 5  P MAP7XX0  Project 0-0- 10 

5 0-10 
Total 20  Total 19 

Grand total 77 
 

S.No. Category Course Total Total 
Category Title Courses Credits 

1 C Compulsory 11 38 
2 PE Program Electives 6 18 
3 OE Open Elective 2 6 
4 P Project 2 15 

Total  77 
 
 
 

(6) Topic Cloud 

Compulsory Topics: 

(a) Linear Algebra (Finite dimensional Vector Spaces, linear transformations, Inner 

Product Spaces, Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors, Jordan canonical forms, Matrix 

theory, Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors, Spectral Analysis) 

58 
 



(b) Real Analysis (Basic properties of real system, study of Metric spaces, Calculus of 

several variables, Function spaces), Abstract Algebra (Basic algebraic structures, 

group theory, ring theory, Galois Theory) 

(c) Topology (Topological structures and their properties, transformation between 

topological spaces), Functional Analysis (Normed linear spaces, Banach spaces, Lp 

Spaces, Hilbert Spaces, Linear transformations and their properties) 

(d) Complex Analysis (Fundamental theorem of Complex Analysis, Residue theorem, 

Contour integration and its applications, evaluation of Improper integrals, conformal 

mappings) 

(e) Probability theory (Univariate and multi-variate Probability Distributions and their 

properties, weak laws of large numbers, central limit theorem). 

(f) Statistics (sampling distributions, estimation of parameters, interval estimation, 

testing of hypotheses), Statistical modelling (Estimation of parameters, Interval 

estimation, Testing of hypotheses) 

(g) Ordinary Differential Equations (Existence and Uniqueness of solution, Sturm-

Liouville problems and properties of its solutions) 

(h) Partial differential equations and their applications 

(i) Fundamentals of Programming 

(j) Numerical Techniques (Root finding methods, Solution for system of linear 

equations, Power method), Solution to System of linear Equations, Interpolation, 

Numerical solution of Ordinary Differential Equations. 
 

Elective Topics: 

Fourier analysis, Wavelets analysis, Dynamical Systems, Operations Research, Number 
Theory, Calculus of Variations, Integral Equations, Statistical Inference, Graphs Theory, 
Stochastic Calculus, Measure and Integration, Chaos Theory, Numerical Methods for 
Partial Differential Equations, Discrete Mathematics. 
 

 
 

(7) List of Electives 
 

(a) Department of Mathematics 
 MAL7XX0: Measure and Integration 
 MAL7XX0: Financial Engineering 
 MAL7XX0: Wavelets analysis and Applications   
 MAL7XX0: Dynamical Systems 
 MAL7XX0: Optimization 
 MAL7XX0: Numerical Analysis 
 MAL7XX0: Number Theory 
 MAL7XX0: Statistical Inference 
 MAL7XX0: Graph Theory 
 MAL7XX0: Calculus of Variation and Integral Equations 
 MAL7XX0: Stochastic Calculus  
 MAL7XX0: Algebraic Number Theory 
 MAL7XX0: Machine Learning and Pattern Recognition 
 MAL7XX0: Chaos Theory and its Applications 
 MAL7XX0: Representations of finite groups 
 MAL8XX0: Numerical Partial Differential Equations 
 MAL7XX0: Selected Topics in Mathematics - I (1-0-0-0) 
 MAL7XX0: Selected Topics in Mathematics - II (2-0-0-0) 
 MAL7XX0: Selected Topics in Mathematics - III (3-0-0-0) 

59 
 



 
(b) From sister Departments 

 Theory of Vibrations 
 Finite Element Methods in Engineering 
 Incompressible Fluid Flow 
 Computer Graphics 
 Advanced Computer Graphics 
 Digital Image Analysis 
 Statistical Signal Analysis 
 Statistical Decision Theory 
 Computational Imaging 
 Multimedia Communication 
 Classical Mechanics 
 Quantum Mechanics 
 Statistical Physics 
 Introduction to Quantum Technologies 

  

60 
 



(8) Content of compulsory courses: 

 
Course Title Linear Algebra Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest. 

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Concept of linear spaces, mapping between spaces, norm and their action on 
spaces. 

2. Eigenvalues, eigenvectors and diagonalization, and Primary decomposition 
theorem. 

3. Normal operators and Spectral theory of real symmetric normal operators. 
 
Contents 
Vector Spaces, Matrices and System of Linear Equations [10 Lectures]: System of 
linear equations,Matrices and rank, Vector Spaces over fields, Subspaces, Bases and 
dimension, Direct sum of the sub spaces. 
 
Linear Transformation and Inner Product Spaces [10 Lectures]: Linear 
Transformations, Rank and Nullity theorem, Representation of linear transformations 
by matrices, duality and transpose. Inner product spaces, Gram-Schmidt 
orthonormalization, orthogonal projections. 
 
Operators and Spectral Theorem [20 Lectures]:Linear functionals and adjoints, 
Hermitian, self-adjoint, Unitary and normal operators, Spectral theorem for real 
operators, Eigenvalues, Eigenvectors, Characteristic polynomials, minimal polynomials, 
Cayley Hamilton Theorem, triangulation, diagonalization, Jordan canonical forms 
(without proof). 

 
Textbook  

1. Hoffman, K., and Kunze R., Linear Algebra,  Pearson Education (India) 2003. 
2. Herstein, I.N., Topics in Algebra, 2nd Edn., John Wiley and Sons. 
3. Lax, P., Linear Algebra and its applications, John Wiley & Sons, Indian Edition 1997 
4. Lang, S., Linear Algebra, 3rd Edition, Springer, 2004. 

 
Reference Books  

1. Artin, M., Algebra, Prentice Hall of India, 1994. 
2. Axler, S., (1997), Linear Algebra Done Right. 
3. Kumaresan, S., (2000) Linear Algebra – A Geometric Approach, PHI Learning. 
4. Sharma, R. K., Shah, S. K. and Shankar, A. G., Algebra I: A Basic Course in 

Algebra, Pearson Education, 2011. 
 
Online course Material  

1. Rana, I.K., Basic Linear Algebra, NPTEL Course material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Bombay,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111101115/ 

 
 
 
 
 

61 
 



Course Title Real Analysis Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. To train the student in the area of real analysis 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for 

further applications in their respective domains of interest 
 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Metric spaces, completeness and Baire Category. 
2. Continuity, Uniform continuity, Contraction mapping, fixed point theorem.  
3. Connectedness and Compactness and Heine-Borel theorem. 
4. Function spaces, Weiestrass approximation theorem. 

 
Contents 
Real Number System, Limits and Continuity [10 Lectures]:  Countable and uncountable 
sets, the axiom of choice, Zorn‟s lemma, Real number system, Consequences of 
completeness property, limit and continuity of functions, uniform continuity.   

Metric Spaces [10 Lectures]: Metric spaces, continuous and uniformly continuous 
functions, bounded and totally bounded sets, Compactness, Heine-Borel Theorem, 
Completeness, Cantor‟s Intersection theorem, Baire spaces, Connectedness.  

Sequences and Series of Functions: [10 Lectures]Sequences and Series of functions, 
Uniform convergence, Uniform convergence and integration, Uniform convergence and 
differentiation,  

Multivariable Calculus [10 Lectures]: Functions of several variables, continuity, 
differentiability, partial derivatives, Jacobian, Inverse Function Theorem and the Implicit 
Function Theorem, multivariable integration, Fubini‟s theorem, Change of variables, Line 
integrals, surface integrals, Green‟s theorem, Divergence theorem, Stokes theorem, and 
applications. 
 

Textbook 
1. Aliprantis, C.D., and Burkinshaw, O., Principles of Real Analysis, 3rd Edition. 
2. Apostol, T., Mathematical Analysis, 2nd Edition, Narosa, 2002. 
3. Ghorpade, S.R., and Limaye, B.V., A Course in Multivariable Calculus and Analysis, 

Springer. 
 

Reference Books 
1. Royden, H. L., Real Analysis, Third Edition, Macmillan Publishing Company, 1988. 
2. Rudin, W., Priciples of Mathematical Analysis, Third Edition, McGraw-Hill, 1976. 
3. Davidson, K. R., and Donsig, A. P., Real analysis and applications: Theory in 

practice, Springer Publications, 2010. 
4. Bartle, R., Sherbert, D., Introduction to Real Analysis, 3rd Edition, Wiley 2011. 

 
Online course Material  

1. Kulkarni, S.H., Real Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, 
IIT Madras,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106053/ 
 

 
 
 
 

62 
 



Course Title Ordinary Differential Equations Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. Introduce the concepts of existence and uniqueness of solution of ordinary 
differential equations 

2. Develop analytical techniques to solve ordinary differential equations 
3. Understand the properties of solution of ordinary differential equations 

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Understanding existence, uniqueness, and other properties of a solution of 
ordinary differential equations 

2. Solving ordinary differential equations with series method, Green's function 
method 

3. Solving systems of ODEs, and characterization of their solutions 
 
Contents 

Motivations and origins, Existence-Uniqueness [7 Lectures]: Existence of solutions by 
Picard‟s method, uniqueness and continuous dependence w.r.t. initial conditions and 
parameters, continuation of solutions, existence  and uniqueness of solutions to 
system of differential equations. 
 
Second Order Linear Equations [23 Lectures]: General solution of differential 
equations using method of undetermined coefficients, method of variation of 
parameters, variable coefficients equations, Power series solution method, Legendre‟s 
equation, Frobenius method, Bessel‟s equation, Green's function method, Sturm-
Liouville problems, orthogonal eigen-function expansions, Sturm comparison theorem, 
Sturm separation theorem, 
 
Systems of Differential Equations [10 Lectures]: Phase plane method, critical points of 
the system and their stability analysis, algebraic properties of solutions, the 
eigenvalue-eigenvector method of finding solutions, fundamental matrix solutions, 
matrix exponential, nonhomogeneous equations. 

 
Text Books 

1. Ross, S. L., Introduction to ordinary differential equations, 4th Ed., John Wiley 
Publications, 1989 

2. Braun. M., Differential Equations and Their Applications, 3rd  Ed., Springer-Verlag, 
1983 

3. Chicone, C., Ordinary Differential Equations with Applications, 2nd  Ed., Springer, 
2006 

 
Reference Books 

1. Coddington, E. A., An Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations, PHI 
Learning 1999 

2. Birkhoff, G. and Rota G., Ordinary Differential Equations, 4th Ed., Wiley 
Publications, 1989 

3. Simmons, G., Differential Equations with Applications and Historical Notes, 2nd 
Ed., McGraw Hill Education, 2017 

 
Online Course Material 

1. Agrawal, P. N. and Pandey, D. N., Ordinary and partial differential equations and 
applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IITRoorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107111/ 

63 
 



2. Raghavendra V., Ordinary differential equations, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Mathematics, IIT Kanpur,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111104031/ 

 
 
 
  

64 
 



Course Title Probability and Statistics Course No. MAL5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. Demonstrate an understanding of the basic principles of probability theory. 
2. Use of the properties of discrete and continuous random variables with their 

joint, marginal, and conditional distributions. 
3. Use of the various families of probability distributions to model various types of 

data. 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Understanding of probability theory and statistics to solve industrial problems. 
2. Understanding of random sampling, theory of estimation and testing of 

hypotheses. 
 
Contents: 

Probability spaces and Random Variables[15 lectures]: Probability measure, 
conditional probability, Bayes‟ theorem, Random variable, cumulative distribution 
function and its properties, probability density function, functions of a random 
variable, standard discrete and continuous distributions and their applications, 
Transformation, moments, Chebychev‟s inequality. 

Joint Distributions[10 lectures]: Random vectors, joint, marginal and conditional 
distributions, conditional expectation, independence, correlation and regression, Bi-
variate normal distribution, functions of random vectors, transformation. 

Limit Theorems[3 lectures]: Convergence of sequences of random variables, weak and 
strong laws of large numbers, central limit theorems. 

Estimation and Tests of Hypotheses[14 lectures]: Sampling distributions, estimation of 
parameters, maximum likelihood method and method of moments, interval estimation, 
testing of hypotheses. 

 
Text Books 

1. Rohatgi, V. K., and Saleh, A. K. M. E., An Introduction to Probability and 
Statistics, Second Edition, Wiley India, 2000. 

2. Casella, G. and Berger, R. (2002). Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning. 
3. Hoel, P.G., Port, S.C. and Stone, C.J. (1971). Introduction to Probability Theory, 

Houghton Mifflin Series in Statistics. 
 

Reference Books 
1. Hogg, R. V., McKean J. W., and Craig A., Introduction to Mathematical Statistics, 

Sixth Edition, Pearson Education India, 2006. 
2. Prakasa Rao, B. L., S., A First Course in Probability and Statistics, World 

Scientific/Cambridge University Press India, 2009. 
3. Castaneda, L. B., Arunachalam, V., and Dharmaraja, S., Introduction to 

probability and stochastic processes with Applications. Wiley, 2012 
 

Online Course Material: 
1. Kumar, S., Probability and Statistics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 

Mathematics, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105090/ 
 
 
 
 

65 
 



Title Programing techniques Number MAL5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 2–0–2-0 

[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  

The Instructor will: 
1. introduce the basics of computer programming in C/C++. 
2. Teach to develop well-structured programs in C/C++. 
 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Write well structures programs in C/C++. 
2. Implement and solve algebraic and transcendental equations and system of 

equations numerically. 
Contents  

 
 
  

Introduction[2 Lectures]:machine language, assembly language, high-level programming 
languages, compiler, interpreter, loader, linker, and flowchart. 
 
Basic features of programming (Using C/C++) [8 Lectures]:Data types, variables, 
operators, expressions, control structures, functions, parameter passing conventions. 
 
Advanced features of programming [8 Lectures]: Pointers, arrays, operations on data 
(Insert, delete, search, traverse and modify), structures, introduction to classes. 
 
Root finding methods [4 Lectures]: Bisection method, Secant method, the method of 
false position, Newton-Raphson method. 
 
Solution of system of linear equations [6 Lectures]: Gauss elimination, Gauss-Jordan 
method, LU decomposition, Crout's Method, Do-little Method, and Cholesky 
decomposition. 

 
Textbooks  

1. Balaguruswamy, E., Programming in ANSI C, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2004. 
2. Lafore, R., Object-Oriented  Programming in C++, Fourth Edition, Pearson, 2002. 
3. Burden,  R. L., Numerical Analysis, Ninth Edition, Cengage Learning India, 2012. 

Reference Books  
1. Schildt, H., C: The Complete Reference, Fourth Edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 2000. 
2. Datta,  B. N., Numerical Linear Algebra and Applications, 2nd Edition, PHI, 2010. 

Online Course Material  
1. Kumar, S.A., Principles of Programming Languages, NPTEL Course Material, 

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102067/.   

2. Gupta, D., Introduction to Problem Solving and Programming, NPTEL Course 
Material, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106104074/. 

3. Nayak,  A. K. and Kumar S., Numerical methods, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107105/. 
 

 
 

66 
 



Course Title Abstract Algebra Course No. MAL6XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. To train the student in the domain of Abstract Algebra. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for 
further applications in their respective domains of interest.  

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Modules, Dual modules, Cyclic Primary modules and Decomposition theorem. 
2. Nilpotent and Solvable groups, Galois Theory, splitting Fields, Normal extension, 
Fundamental theorem of Galois theory  

 
Contents: 
 
Group Theory [10 lectures]: Review of Group theory (Symmetric Groups, 
Transformation Groups), Abelian groups, Sylow Theorems, nilpotent and solvable 
groups. 
 
Ring Theory [11 lectures]: Rings, Polynomial Rings, Prime ideals, Maximal Ideals, 
Principal Ideal Domain, Unique Factorization domain, Euclidian Algorithm.  
 
Field extensions [5 lectures]: Finite extension, algebraic extensions. 
 
Galois Theory [16 lectures]: Galois Theory, splitting Fields, Normal extension, 
Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory and its applications. 
 
 
Text Book 

1. Cohn, P. M., Basic algebra: Groups, rings and fields, 2 Ed., Springer, 2005 
2. Jacobson, N., Basic Algebra I, Dover Publication, 2009 
3. Jacobson, N., Basic Algebra II, Dover Publication, 2012 

 
Reference Books 

1. Artin, M., Algebra, Second Edition, Pearson, 2010 
4. Dummit, D. S. and Foote, R. M., Abstract algebra, 3 Ed., Wiley, 2004 
5. Stewart, I., Galois Theory, Third Edition, Chapman and Hall, 2003 

 
Online Course Material: 

1. Gross, B., Abstract Algebra, Online Course Material, Harvard Extension School, 
http://matterhorn.dce.harvard.edu/engage/ui/index.html#/1999/01/82345 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

67 
 



Course Title Complex Analysis Course No. MAL5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-1[4] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. To train the student in the area of complex analysis. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for 

further applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Cauchy-Riemann Equations, Homotopy of paths. 
2. Cauchy-Goursat theorem and Cauchy‟s Integral Formula. 
3. Evaluation of improper integrals. 

 
Contents 
 

Introduction to functions of complex variables [14 Lectures]: Elementary functions, 
continuity, differentiability, Analytic Functions, Cauchy Riemann Equations. 
 
Complex Integration[14 Lectures]: Line and Contour Integrals, anti-derivatives of a 
complex function, Cauchy-Goursat Theorem, Simply and multiply connected domains, 
Cauchy‟s Integral formula, Taylor and Laurent Series expansion, Liouville‟s Theorem, 
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, Maximum modulus principle. 
 
Residue Theory[10 Lectures] Residues and poles, Cauchy‟s residue theorem, Jordan‟s 
Theorem, evaluation of Improper integrals 
 
Conformal mappings[4 Lectures]: Conformal mapping, Special transformation, 
Mobious transformation. 

 
Text Books 

1. Lang, S., Complex Analysis, Fourth Edition, Springer-Verlag, 1999 
2. Brown, J. W. and Churchill, R. V., Complex variables and applications, 9 Ed., 

McGraw Hill Publications, 2013 
 
Reference Books 

1. Ahlfors, L.V., Complex Analysis, 3rd edition, McGraw Hill, 2000. 
2. Ablowitz, M. J., and Fokas, A. S., Complex variables: Introduction and 

applications, 2 Ed., Cambridge University Press, 2003. 
3. Shastri, A.R., An Introduction to Complex Analysis, Macmillan India, New Delhi, 

1999. 
 

Online Resources 
1. Sree Krishna, P.A.S., Complex Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 

Mathematics, IIT Guwahati,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111103070/ 
2. Swaminathan, A. and Katiyar, V.K. Complex Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, 

Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107056/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

68 
 



Course Title Partial Differential Course No. MAL6XX0 
Equations 

Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
1. Introduce the concepts of existence and uniqueness of solution of partial differential 

equations 
2. Develop analytical techniques to solve partial differential equations 
3. Understand the properties of solution of partial differential equations 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding existence, uniqueness, and other properties of a solution of partial 

differential equations 
2. Solving partial differential equations with Fourier series method, Green's function 

method,  Laplace transform method, and Fourier transform method 
 
Contents 
 

Motivations and origins [3 Lectures]:  PDEs of engineering and physics (Heat, wave and 
Laplace equations). 
 
First order partial differential equations [9 Lectures]: Linear, quasi-linear and fully 
nonlinear equations, Lagrange method, the Cauchy problem, Cauchy method of 
characteristics, compatible systems, Charpit method.  
 
Second order partial differential equations [12 Lectures]: Classification and Canonical 
forms, Adjoint operators, Riemann‟s method, solving linear partial differential equations 
with constant coefficients. 
 
Elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic equations[16 Lectures]: Variable separation method for 
Laplace/Poisson equation, heat conduction equation, wave equation, Burger equation,  
D‟Alembert‟s solution,  Maximum-Minimum principles, Duhamel‟s principle, solutions by 
Green‟s function method. 
 

Text Books 
1. Rao, K. S., Introduction to partial differential equations, 3rd Edition, PHI, 2011 
2. Logan, J. D., Applied partial differential equations, 3rd  Ed., Springer, 2015 
3. Pinchover, Y. and Rubinstein, J., An introduction to partial differential equations, 

Cambridge University Press, 2005 
 
Reference Books 

1. Sneddon, I. N., Elements of Partial Differential Equations, McGraw-Hill, New 
York,1986 

2. Prasad, P. And Ravindran, R.,  Partial differential equations, New Age 
International Publisher, 2005 

3. Mattheij, R. M. M., Rienstra, S. W., and ten Thije Boonkkamp, J. H. M., Partial 
Differential Equations: Modeling, Analysis, Computation, SIAM Publication, 2005 

 
Online Course Material  

1. Agrawal, P. N. and Pandey D.N., Ordinary and partial differential equations and 
applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107111/ 

2. Sinha, R. K., Partial differential equations, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111103021/ 

69 
 



Title Functional Analysis Number MAL6XX0 

Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 
[3] 

Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To introduce the area of Functional analysis. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for further 

applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Basic idea of a normed linear spaces and operators on normed linear space. 
2. Open Mapping theorem, Hahn-Banach Theorem and their applications. 

 
Contents  

Normed Linear Spaces[14 Lectures]: Normed linear space, subspace of a normed linear 
space, Equivalent norms, Finite Dimensional normed linear spaces, Banach spaces, 
Linear operator, norm of a linear operator, boundedness and continuity, Quotient spaces. 
 
Integrability and Extension Theorems[19 Lectures]: Integrable functions, l_p spaces, 
Minkowski's inequality, Holder's inequality, separability of l_p spaces, uniformly bounded 
operator, principle of uniform boundedness, Sub-linear functional, Semi-norm, Open 
mapping theorem, Closed graph theorem, Hahn-Banach Theorem, dual of a normed 
linear space, reflexive normed linear space. 

 
Hilbert Spaces and their Applications [9 Lectures]: Inner product spaces, polarisation 
identity, Bessel's inequality, Hilbert space, Riesz representation theorem, Operators on 
Hilbert spaces, compact operators, projections and idempotents.  
 
Text Books  

1. Limaye, B. V., Functional Analysis, Second Edition, New Age International, 1996 
2. Lax, P. D., Functional Analysis, First Edition, 2001 
3. Ruddin, W., Functional Analysis, 2nd Ed., McGraw Hill Education, 2017 

 
Reference Books  

1. Conway, J. B., A course in Functional Analysis, Second Edition, Springer-Verlag, 
1994 

2. Goffman, C., and Pedrick, G., A First Course in Functional Analysis, Prentice-Hall, 
1974 
 

Online Course Material  
1. Srivastava, P. D., Functional Analysis,  NPTEL Course Material, Department of 

Mathematics, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/111105037/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70 
 



Course Title Data Structures and Algorithms Course No. MAP5XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 1–0–2-0 [2] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. To provide sufficient skills to prove and analyze efficiency of the algorithms.  
2. To introduce elementary data structures and related operations. 

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Ability to design correct programs to solve problems.  
2. Skills to choose efficient data structures and apply them to solve problems. 
3.  Ability to show the correctness and efficiency of a program. 

 
 
Contents 
 
Performance of algorithms[3 lectures]: Algorithm Development, Complexity analysis 
and asymptotics.  
 
Data structures [11 lectures]: Arrays, pointers, linked lists, stacks, queues, binary 
trees, tree traversals.  
 
A programming laboratory will be set in consonance with the topics covered in 
lectures. This will include assignments in a programming language like C and C++ in 
GNU Linux environment. 

 
 
Text Books 

1. Cormen, T.H., Leiserson, C.E., Rivest, R.L. and Stein, C., Introduction to 
Algorithms, 2nd Ed.,Prentice-Hall of India, 2007. 

2. Sahni, S., Data Structures, Algorithms and Applications in C++, 2nd Ed., 
Universities Press, 2005. 
 

Reference Books 
1. Aho, A. V., Ullman, J. D., and Hopcroft, J. E. (1985), Data Structures and 

Algorithms, Addison-Wesley.  
2. Goodrich, M.T. and Tamassia, R., Data Structures and Algorithms in Java, Wiley, 

2006. 
 
Online course material 

1. Garg, N., Data Structures And Algorithms, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102064/. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

71 
 



Title Topology Number MAL6XX0 

Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 
[3] 

Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
1. To train the students in the domain of Topology. 
2. To give sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by student for further 

applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Topological spaces, order topology and product topology. 
2. Separation axioms, countability axioms Urysohn‟s metrization theorem. 
3. Function spaces, pointwise and uniform convergence, Stone-Weierstrass Theorem.  
 
Contents  
 

Basic Topology [14 Lectures]: Topological spaces, basis and sub-basis, order topology, 
product topology, subspace topology, convergence, closed sets, continuous functions, 
quotient topology  
 
Properties of Topological Spaces [17 Lectures]: Connected spaces, Components, local 
connectedness, compact spaces, limit point compactness, local compactness, 
Countability axioms, separation axioms, normal spaces, Tychonoff spaces, Urysohn‟s 
metrization theorem, Tietze extension theorem, Tychonoff theorem, Stone-Cech 
compactification 

 
Special Topics [09 Lectures]: Function spaces, pointwise and uniform convergence, 
compact-open topology, uniform convergence on compact set, Stone-Weierstrass 
Theorem. 
 
 
Text Books  

1. Munkres, J., Topology, second edition, Pearson Publications, 2000 
2. Willard, S., General Topology, Dover Publications, 2004 

 
Reference Books  

1. Pervin, W. J. and Boas, R. P., Foundations of general topology, Academic Press, 
1964 

2. Simmons, G. F., Introdunction to topology and modern analysis, Tata McGraw-
Hill, 2004 

 
Online Course Material  

1. Veeramani, P., Topology, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT 
Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106054/. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

72 
 



(9) Content of Elective courses: 

 
Title Measure and Integration Number MAL7XX0 

Department Mathematics L-T-P-D 3–0–0-0 [3] 
[C] 

Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  

1. Provide background in the area of Measure Theory. 
2. Provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for 

further applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  

1.  Provide basic understanding of the measures, total variation, absolute continuity, 
and Radon-Nikodym Theorem. 

2.  Impart knowledge in Derivatives of measures, Fundamental Theorem, product 
measures, Fubini‟s Theorem, convolutions, Distribution functions. 

 
Contents  
 

Basics of Measure and Integration [12 Lectures]: Riemann Integration and need for 
generalization, Measurable Sets, measurable functions, functions between measurable 
spaces, Measures on Algebra of Sets, Extension Theorems, Lebesgue and Lebesgue-
Stieltjes measure, Measure, measure spaces. 
 
Integrability [14 Lectures]: Simple functions and their integrals, integral of a non-
negative measurable function, integral of extended real valued non-negative function, 
Monotone Convergence Theorem, Fatou‟s lemma, Integrable functions, Lebesgue 
Dominated Convergence Theorem, Lebesgue Spaces L_p, Holder‟s Inequality, 
Minkowski‟s Inequality, completeness theorem, L_{\infinity}. 
 
Modes of convergence [6 Lectures]: Relations between convergence almost 
everywhere, convergence in measure and convergence in L_p spaces, Egoroff‟s 
Theorem. 
 
Special Theorems (without proof) [14 Lectures]: Hahn Decomposition Theorem, Jordan 
Decomposition Theorem, Radon-Nikodym Theorem, Lebesgue Decomposition 
Theorem, Riesz Representation Theorem for L_p spaces. 

 
Textbook  

1. Royden, H.L., (1988), Real analysis, 3rd Edition, Macmillan Publishing Company, 
New York 

2. Bartle,R.G., (2014), The Elements of Integration and Lebesgue Measure, John 
Wiley & Sons 

3.  Inder K.Rana, (2007), An Introduction to Measure and Integration, Narosa. 
 
Reference Books  

1. Parthasarathy, K.R., 2005, Introduction to Probability and Measure, TRIM Series, 
Vol. 33, Hindustan book agency, New Delhi. 

2. Halmos, P.R., 1976, Measure Theory, 1st Edition, Springer. 
  
Online Course Material  

1. Rana, I.K., Measure Theory, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, 
IIT Bombay, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_ma15/ 

73 
 



 
Title Financial Engineering Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  

1. Securities Pricing Securities, Risk Management Assessment, prediction and decision 
making, under uncertainty, regarding future events and their consequences 

2. Portfolio Optimization Balancing risk and return 
3. Modeling Pricing of derivatives and Itos calculus 

 
Learning Outcomes  

1. Valuation of financial portfolio 
2. Pricing of financial derivatives (options and contracts) 
3. Understanding risk and return 

 
Contents  
 

[18 lectures]:Introduction to financial markets and financial instruments, financial 
derivatives, risk and return, risky and risk free assets, interest rates, bonds, bonds pricing, 
spot and forward rates, investment portfolio, mean-variance analysis, capital asset pricing 
model, arbitrage pricing theory. 
 
[22 lectures]:Discrete time models, stock and money market models, principle of no 
arbitrage, pricing of contracts (forward and future), options, put-call parity, option pricing, 
martingales, Binomial model, CRR model, Black-Scholes formula, Greeks, random walk, 
Brownian motion, stochastic process, Itos integral and Ito-Deoblins formula. 
 
Textbook  

1. M. Capinski and T. Zastawniak, Mathematics for finance: an introduction to financial 
engineering, Springer, 2010.  

2. S.N. Neftci, Principles of financial engineering. Academic Press/Elsevier, 2009. 
 
Reference Books  

1. J.C. Hull, Options, futures and other derivatives. Pearson India, 2011. 
2. S.E. Shreve, Stochastic calculus for finance I: The binomial asset pricing model, 

Springer, 2000. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

74 
 



 
Course Title Wavelet Analysis and Applications Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. To introduce the origin of wavelet transform 
2. To develop the understanding of multiresolution analysis for different types of 

signals 
3. To equip the students with various possible applications of the wavelet transform 

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Strong understanding of Fourier and wavelet transform. 
2. Answer to the question why wavelet transform is a better tool for signal analysis. 
3. Implement and apply wavelet transform for various applications. 

 
Contents 
Fourier Analysis [12 Lectures]: Fourier and inverse Fourier transforms, Gabor 
transform, short time Fourier transform and the uncertainty principle. 
 
Wavelet Analysis [18 Lectures]: Mother wavelet, orthogonal and biorthogonal 
wavelets, continuous and discrete wavelet transform, basic properties of wavelet 
transforms, multiresolution analysis, Haar wavelet transform, Dabuchies Wavelet 
Transform, wave-packet transform 
 
Applications [12 Lectures]: Application of wavelet theory to feature detection, image 
denoising and compression. 

 
Text Books 

1. Chui, C. K., An Introduction to Wavelets, Academic Press Inc., New York, 1992. 
2. Debnath, L., Wavelet Transforms and Their Applications, Birkhauser, 2002. 
3. Mallat, S., A Wavelet Tour of Signal Processing, Academic Press, 1999. 

 
Reference Books 

1. Daubechies, I., Ten Lectures on Wavelets, Society for Industrial and Applied 
Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA, 1992 

2. Akansu, A.N.,  and Haddad, R.A.,  Multiresolution signal Decomposition: 
Transforms, Subbands and Wavelets, Academic Press, Oranld, Florida, 1992 

3. Kaiser, G., A Friendly Guide to Wavelets, Birkhauser, New York, 1995. 
 
Online course Material  

1. Gadre, V.M., Fundamentals of Wavelets, Filter Banks and Time Frequency 
Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108101093/. 

2. Strang, G. and Amaratunga, K., Wavelets, Filter Banks and Applications, Online 
Course Material, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-327-wavelets-filter-banks-and-
applications-spring-2003/.  

 
 
 
 
 
 

75 
 



Course Title Optimization Techniques Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. To train the student in the domain of linear and non-linear programming 
2. To give sufficient tools for solving programming problems which can be used by 

student for further applications in different areas of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Simplex method, Charne‟s M-method, Two-phase Method 
2. Duality and Integer programming problem 
3. Transportation problem, assignment Problem, Karmakar‟s Algorithm and Wolf‟s 

method 
4. Newton‟s method, Conjugate direction method and Quasi-Newton methods 
5. KKT conditions, penalty and Barrier Methods, exact penalty functions  

 
Contents 
Linear Programming [23 lectures]: Linear combination of vectors, Convex set, Convex 
hull, Linear programming problem, feasible solution, basic feasible solution, graphical 
solution,  Simplex method Charne‟s M method, Two phase method, Solving system of 
equations and finding the inverse of a matrix using simplex method, duality, 
Complementary Slackness Theorem, Duality and Simplex method, dual simplex 
algorithm, Integer Programming, Gomory‟s cut-constraint method, Branch and Bound 
method, Transportation problem, Assignment problem, application of optimization.  
 
Nonlinear Programming [19 lectures]: First and second order conditions, Iterative 
methods, line search methods, global convergence of descent algorithms, Newton‟s 
method, Conjugate direction method, Quasi-Newton Method, Constrained optimization 
- Lagrange Multipliers, Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions, Regular points, Sensitivity 
analysis, Quadratic Programming, Convex problems, applications of optimization. 

 
Text Book 

1. Luenberger, D. G., Linear and Nonlinear Programming, Yinyu Ye, Third  Edition, 
Springer, 2008.  

2. Kambo, N. S., Mathematical Programming Techniques,  Second Edition, Affiliated 
East West Press, 2005  

 
Reference Books 

1. Bazaraa, M. S., Sherali, H.D., and Shetty, C. M., Nonlinear Programming: Theory 
and Algorithms, Third Edition, Wiley publications, 2006 

2. Darst, R, Introduction to Linear Programming: Applications and Extensions, 
Dekker Publications, 1991 

 
Online Course Material: 

1. Goswami, A., Optimization, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, 
IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105039/1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

76 
 



Course Title Numerical Analysis Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 

1. Learn numerical techniques for a variety of mathematical problems 
2. Analyze the validity and error in the numerical results 

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Develop an understanding of numerical error and applicability of a particular 
method. 

2. Solve numerically algebraic equations, linear systems of equations, ordinary 
differential equations and eigenvalue problems. 

3. Carry out numerical differentiation, integration, and interpolation 
Contents 

Errors analysis[4 Lectures]: Numerical Algorithms and errors, Floating point systems, 
Types of error, Propagation of Error, the stability of algorithms. 
Nonlinear equations [8 Lectures]: Newton-Raphson Method, Fixed-Point Iteration 
Method, Muller‟s method, criterion for acceptance of a root, Rates of Convergence. 

Numerical solution of linear system of equations [8 Lectures]: Ill- conditioned systems, 
iterative methods (Gauss-Seidel method, Gauss-Jacobi method), matrix inversion, Rate 
of Convergence, Rayleigh Quotient, Min-max principle, the power and inverse power 
methods for eigenvalue problems. 

Interpolation [8 Lectures]: Errors in polynomial interpolation, finite differences, 
Newton‟s formulae for interpolation, Lagrange interpolation formula, Hermite 
interpolation, Spline interpolation. 

Numerical Integration and Differentiation [6 Lectures]: Newton-Cotes integration 
formulae, Difference Formulae, Method of Undetermined Coefficients. 

Numerical IVPs for Ordinary Differential Equations [8 Lectures]: Taylor series method, 
Euler‟s Method, Modified Euler‟s Methods, Runge-Kutta Methods. 

Tools to be used: MATLAB, Mathematica, Octave, Scilab. 

 
Text Books 

1. Süli, E. and Mayers, D.F., An Introduction to Numerical Analysis, Cambridge Uni. 
Press, 2006. 

2. Sastry, S.S., Introductory Methods of Numerical Analysis, Prentice Hall of India 
Pvt. Ltd., 2007. 

3. Burden, R. L., Numerical Analysis, 9th Edition, Cengage Learning India, 2012 
 
Reference Books 

1. Conte, S.D. and Boor, C., Elementary Numerical Analysis: An Algorithmic 
Approach, Third Edition, McGraw-Hill Publication, 1980 

2. Chapra, S.C., Applied Numerical Methods with MATLAB for Engineers and 
Scientists, 3 Ed., McGraw Hill, 2012 

 
Online course Material  

1. Lal, R. and Banerjee S., Numerical Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107062/ 

2. Usha, R., Numerical Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Mathematics, IIT Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106101/ 

 
 

77 
 



Course Title Number Theory Course No. MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA) Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
 1.To give basic knowledge of Number theory. 
 2. To equip students with number theoretic tools which can be used in their fields of 
interest. 

 
Learning Outcomes 
 1. Basic knowledge of Residue systems and RSA Cryptosystems. 
 2. Diophantine Equations, Pells Equation, Binary Quadratic Forms and their Applications. 
 
Contents 
Introduction [10 Lectures]: Divisibility, prime numbers, properties and their distribution, 
complete and reduced residue systems, theorems of Fermat, Euler & Wilson, application to 
RSA cryptosystem. 

Congruences [10 Lectures]: Linear congruences, Chinese Remainder theorem, quadratic 
congruences, and Quadratic Reciprocity law. 

Arithmetical functions [15 Lectures]: examples, properties and their rate of growth, 
Continued fractions, and their connections with Diophantine approximations, applications 
to linear and Pell‟s equations, Binary quadratic forms, Partition: basic properties and 
results. 

Diophatine equations [6 Lectures]: linear, quadratic and higher degree, some general 
equations. 

 
Text Books  

1. David M. Burton, Elementary Number Theory. McGraw Hill Education, 2012. 
2. G. H. Hardy and E. M. Wright. An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers. Oxford 

University Press, 1960. 
 
Reference Books 

1. Niven, H. S. Zuckerman and H. L. Montgomery. An Introduction to the Theory of 
Numbers, Wiley, 1991 

2. K. Ireland, and M. Rosen. A Classical Introduction to Modern Number Theory. GTM-
84, Springer, 1990. 

 
Online Resources 

1. Saikia, A., Number Theory, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT 
Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111103020/. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

78 
 



Title Statistical Inference Number MAL7XX0 
Departmet Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/Ph.D. (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  

1. To provide background in the area of Statistics. 
2. To provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for 

further applications in their respective domains of interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes  

1.  Basic understanding of the Point and Interval Estimation, Testing of Hypotheses, 
Non-parametric Estimation 

2.  Knowledge in Random Sampling, Unbiased Estimation, Bias-Variance Tradeoff, 
Goodness of Fit.  

 
Contents  
Random Sampling & Sampling Distributions [5 lectures]: Random sampling, exact 
sampling distributions: Chi-square, t and F distributions, large sample theory. 

Point and Interval Estimations [16 lectures]: Point estimator, properties of an estimator, 
factorization, MVUE, maximum likelihood method of estimation, Cramer-Rao bound, 
confidence interval estimation. 

Tests of Hypotheses [21 lectures]: Review of hypotheses testing, Neyman-Pearson theory, 
general linear hypothesis, method of least squares, analysis of variance (one way and two 
way), analysis of categorical data, Chi-square test for goodness of fit, test of 
independence, non-parametric tests. 

 
Text Books  

1. Rohatgi, V. K., Statistical Inference, Dover Publications Inc., 2003. 
2. Hogg, R. V., McKean, J. W., Craig, A. T., Introduction to Mathematical Statistics, 

Pearson, 2009. 
 
Reference Books  

1. Casella, G. and Berger, R. L., Statistical Inference, Brooks/Cole Publishing Company, 
2003. 

2. Rao, C. R., Linear Statistical Inference and Its Applications, Wiley, 2006. 
3. Gibbons, J.D. and Chakroborti, S., Nonparametric Statistical Inference, CRC Press, 

2010 
 

Online Course material: 
1. Zhou Fan, Introduction to Statistical Inference, Online Course Material, Stanford 

University, http://web.stanford.edu/class/stats200/ 
2. Kumar, S., Statistical Inference, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 

Mathematics, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105124/ 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

79 
 



Title Stochastic Calculus Number MAL7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D 3–0–0-0 

[C] [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/Ph.D.(MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  

1. To develop an understanding of financial market 
2. Given a discrete process, pricing of options, such as European, American, Asian 

and other exotic options 
3. To develop an understanding of change of measure, Martingales and Brownian 

motion 
4. Use of Black-Scholes model under various conditions 

 
Learning Outcomes  

1. Understanding derivatives and securities 
2. Pricing and valuation in discrete case 
3. Binomial model and self-financing strategy 
4. Black Scholes model and interest rate models 

 
Contents  
 
[10 lectures]:General probability spaces, Gaussian and log-normal distribution, 
martingales and stopping times, Brownian motion and its properties, Ito‟s integral and 
martingale properties of Ito‟s integral. 
 
[12 lectures]:Continuous time financial market models, Black-Scholes-Merton model, 
Black-Scholes PDE and formulas, risk-neutral valuation, option pricing, the Greeks, put-
call parity, Risk-neutral valuation, risk-neutral measure, Girsanov's theorem for change 
of measure, martingale representation theorems, representation of Brownian 
martingales 
 
[20 lectures]:Stochastic differential equations, existence and uniqueness of solutions, 
Feynman-Kac formula and its applications, models with stochastic volatility, pricing and 
hedging in incomplete markets, bond markets, term-structures of interest rates, bond 
pricing, Short rate models, martingale models for short rate, Vasicek, Cox-Ingersoll-Ross 
and Hull-White models, multifactor models; Forward rate models, Heath-Jarrow-Morton 
model. 
 
Textbooks  

1. Shreve, S. E., Stochastic Calculus for Finance I; The Binomial Asset Pricing Model 
, Springer-Verlag, 2004  

2. Shreve, S. E., Stochastic Calculus for Finance II; Continuous-Time Model, 
Springer, 2004. 
 

Reference Books  
     1. Baxter, M. and Rennie, A., Financial Calculus, University Press, Cambridge 1996 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

80 
 



Title Calculus of variations and Integral Number MAL7XX0 
Equations 

Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-D [3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/Ph.D.(MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce variational problems with methods to solve them. 
2. Introduce the integral transforms and integral equations, and their solution 

methods 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Maximize or minimize functionals associated with the variational problems. 
2. Apply integral transforms to solve differential equations. 
3. Solve Fredholm and Volterra integral equations. 

 
Contents  
 

Calculus of Variation [20 Lectures]: Introduction to Variational problems, functionals, 
Functional dependence on first order derivatives, Euler equations, Functional dependence 
on functions of several independent variables, Variational problems with moving 
boundaries, Rayleigh-Ritz and Galerkin‟s Method. 

Integral Transforms [8 Lectures]: Fourier, Fourier sine/cosine and Laplace transforms 
and their properties, convolution theorem and application to solve differential equations. 

Integral Equations [12 Lectures]: Classification of Integral equations, Neumann‟s 
iterative method for Fredholm‟s equation of the second kind, Volterra type integral 
equations, Integral equations of the first kind and Convolution type Integral Equations. 

 
Text books  

1. Gupta, A.S., Calculus of Variation, Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd. 1996 
2. Debnath L. and Bhatta, D., Integral transformations and their applications, 2nd 

Edition,  Chapman and Hall / CRC publications, 2007 
3. Moiseiwitsch, B. L., Integral equations, Logman, 1977 

 
Reference Books  

1. Gelfand, I. M. and Francis, S.V., Calculus of Variation, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 
1963 

2. Yosida, K., Lectures on differential and integral equations, Dover, 1991 
3. Hildebrand, F. B. , Methods of applied mathematics, 2nd Ed, Prentice-Hall, 1965 

 
Online Course Material  

1. Agrawal, P.N. and Pandey, D.N., Integral equations, calculus of variations and its 
applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107103/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

81 
 



Title Chaos Theory and its Applications Number MA7XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 

[3] 
Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  

1. To equip the students with the basic fundamentals of chaos theory. 
2. Learning and understanding various routes to chaos.  
3. To introduce applications of chaos to various physical systems and its introduction 

in IFS. 
 
Learning Outcomes  

1. Notion of chaos in one dimension. 
2. Understanding Bifurcation theory and different routes to chaos. 
3. Two dimensional flows, phase portraits and chaos in higher dimension. 

 
Contents  
Discrete Dynamical Systems[16 Lectures]: One dimensional maps, Fixed points, periodic 
points and Stability, Basin of Attraction, Bifurcation, period doubling and route to chaos, 
Sharkovsky‟s theorem, Li-Yorke Theorem, Lorentz System and chaos, Chaos in one 
dimension, density of periodic points, transitivity, sensitive dependence on initial 
conditions, cantor‟s set, conjugacy, symbolic dynamics, Various notions of chaos, Phase 
space diagrams, Linear Systems and their stability. 
 
Continuous Dynamical Systems[14 Lectures]: One dimensional flows, chaos in one 
dimension, Fixed points and Stability, Flows on the circle, Bifurcation, Saddle node 
Bifurcation, Transcritical Bifurcation, Pitchfork Bifurcation, Hopf Bifurcation, phase 
portraits,  existence and uniqueness, fixed points and linearization, conservative 
systems, limit cycles, Poincare-Bendixson Theorem.   
 
Fractals and Dynamical Systems[12 Lectures]: Fractals, cantor set, dimension of self-
similar fractals, Box dimension, correlation dimension, Iterated Function System, Collage 
Theorem and Image Compression, Julia and Mandelbrot Sets. 
 
Textbook  

1. Saber N.  Elaydi, Discrete Chaos: With Applications in Science and Engineering, 
CRC Press, Second Edition. 

2. Steven H.  Strogatz, Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos:  With Applications to 
Physics, Biology, Chemistry and Engineering, Westview Press, First edition. 

 
Reference Books  

1. H Nagashima and Y Baba, Introduction to Chaos:  Physics and Mathematics of 
Chaotic Phenomena, CRC Press; First edition. 

2. G. Stuck and Michael Brin, Introduction to Dynamical Systems, Cambridge 
University Press; First edition 

 
Online Course Material  

1. Nagar A. (IIT Delhi) Chaotic Dynamical Systems, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111102110/ 

2. Banerjee S. (IIT Kharagpur), Chaos, Fractals and Dynamic Systems,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105054/ 

 
 
 
 

82 
 



Title Machine Learning and Pattern Number MA7XX0 
Recognition 

Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0 
[3] 

Offered for M.Sc.(MA)/M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce the mathematical and statistical techniques used in pattern recognition. 
2. Impart knowledge on differentiate among various pattern recognition techniques. 

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Formulate high dimensional feature vectors from observations. 
2. Select an appropriate pattern analysis tool for analysing data in a given feature 

space. 
3. Apply pattern analysis tools to practical applications and detect patterns in the 

data. 
 
Contents  
Introduction [2 Lectures]: Definitions, data sets for Pattern Recognition, Different 
Paradigms of Pattern Recognition. 
 
Bayes Decision Theory [8 Lectures]: Bayes Decision Theory: Bayes decision rule, 
Minimum error rate classification, Normal density and discriminant functions, Bayesian 
networks. 
 
Generative Methods [8 Lectures]: Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian Parameter 
Estimation, Nonparametric techniques. 
 
Discriminative Methods [8 Lectures]: Distance-based methods, Linear Discriminant 
Functions, Artificial Neural Networks, Support Vector Machines. 
 
Clustering and Principal Component Analysis [8 Lectures]: k-means clustering, Gaussian 
Mixture Modeling, EM-algorithm, PCA, Kernel PCA, Probabilistic PCA. 
 
Combining Classifiers [8 Lectures]: Bagging and Boosting, Adaboost, Bayesian Model 
Averaging. 
 
Textbook  

1. Duda, R. O., Hart, P. E. and Stork, D., Pattern Classification 2/e, Wiley, 2002.  
2. Bishop, C., Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer, 2006. 

 
Reference Books  

1. Theodoridis, S. and Koutroumbas, K. (2008) Pattern Recognition, Edition 4. 
Academic Press.  

2. MacKay, D.J.C. (2004) Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algorithms, 
Cambridge University Press. 

3. Cristianini, N. and Taylor, J. S. (2000) An Introduction to Support Vector 
Machines, Cambridge University Press. 

 
Online Course Material  

1. Das, S. and Murthy, C.A. (IIT Madras) Pattern Recognition, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106046/ 
 

83 
 



Title Numerical solutions of Partial Differential Number MAL8XX0 
Equations 

Department Mathematics L-T-P 3–0–0 [3] 
[C] 

Offered for M.Tech.(DCS)/PhD (MA) Type Elective  
Prerequisite Partial Differential Equations   
 
Objectives  

The Instructor will introduce  
1. finite difference schemes for numerical solutions of partial differential equations 
2. carry out numerical analysis of various finite difference schemes  

 
Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. apply finite difference schemes for numerical solution of partial differential 

equations 
2. carry out error analysis and stability analysis of finite difference schemes 

 
Contents  
 

Fractal 1: Numerical methods for PDE (MAL8XX1) 
 
[8 Lectures] Characterization of PDEs, Finite difference methods for elliptic, parabolic 
and hyperbolic problems. 
 
[6 Lectures]Stability, consistency and convergence theory, dissipation and dispersion, 
error estimates. 
 
Fractal 2: Numerical Analysis for PDE (MAL8XX2) 
 
Parabolic equations [6 Lectures]: Fourier analysis of the error, Alternating direction 
implicit method 
 
Elliptic equations [6 Lectures]: Stability analysis by the energy method, Error analysis 
with a maximum principle, asymptotic error estimates, convergence result 
 
Hyperbolic equations[10 Lectures]: CFL condition, Von Neumann stability Analysis, 
upwind scheme, Lax-Wendroff scheme, leap-frog scheme, Hamiltonian systems and 
symplectic schemes 
 
Numerical linear algebra[6 Lectures]: Classical iterative Methods for solving linear 
systems, large sparse linear systems, GMRES algorithm, preconditioned Conjugate 
Gradient method, multigrid method (overview), Newton's method and its variations for 
solving nonlinear systems. 
 
Text books  

1. Quarteroni, A. and Valli, A. , Numerical Approximation of Partial Differential 
Equations, Springer, 1997 

2. Morton, K. W.  and Mayers, D. F. , Numerical solution of partial differential 
equations, CUP, 2005 

 
Reference Books  

1. Thomas, J. W. , Numerical partial differential equations: Finite difference 
methods, Springer, 1995 

2. Trefethen, L. N. and David Bau III, Numerical Linear Algebra, SIAM, 1997 
 
Online Course Material  

84 
 



1. Nayak, A. K., Numerical methods: Finite Difference Approach, NPTEL Course, 
Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107107/. 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

  

85 
 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Courses 

 

Offered by 

 

Humanities and Social Science Department 

 

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

86 
 



PG Compulsory Courses(to be approved) 

1. HSN7XX0 Technical Communication 1-0-0 (1) 
2. HSN7XX0  Ethics and Professional Life 1-0-0 (1) 
 

PG Electives (to be approved) 

1. HSL7XX0  Cine-Politics under National Emergency 3-0-0 (to be approved) 
2. HSL7XX0 Sociology of Science and Technology 3-0-0 (to be approved) 
3. HSL7XX0 Digital Society 3-0-0 (to be approved) 

 

PG Electives (already approved) 

 

 

4. HSL7XX0 Gender and Society 3-0-0 (3) 
5. HSL7XX0 Sociocultural Theories 3-0-0 (3) 
6. HSL7XX0 Foundations of Sustainability 3-0-0 (3) 
7. HSL7XX0 Nature Writings in American Literature 3-0-0 (3) 
8. HSL7XX0 Literature and Environment 3-0-0(3) 
9. HSL7XX0 Twentieth Century Analytic Philosophy 3-0-0 (3) 
10. HSL7XX0 Language and Cognition 3-0-0 (3) 
11. HSL7XX0 Ethical Theories and Moral Practices 3-0-0 (3) 
12. HSL7XX0 Philosophy of Mind 3-0-0 (3) 
13. HSL7XX0 Bioengineering Ethics 3-0-0 (3) 
14. HSL7XX0 Cognitive Science 3-0-0 (3) 
15. HSL7XX0 Qualitative and Quantitative Methodology 3-0-0(3) 
16. HSL7XX0 Consciousness  3-0-0 (3) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

87 
 



Title Technical Communication Number HSNXX 

Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 

Offered for M.Tech and PhD Type Compulsory 

Prerequisite None   

Objectives  

The Instructor will:  

1. Enable a student to face the challenges in communication, primarily in a technical milieu. 

2.Enhance a student‟s English Language skills namely listening, speaking, reading and writing 
(LSRW) and the role played by them in the process of communication. 

3. Make students conversant in addressing communication challenges that impact organizations 
through sharing of best practices and group learning. 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Comprehend, recognize and articulate the formal elements of specific genres of technical 
communication. 

2.To gain a familiarity with practical and theoretical aspects of various trends and debates in 
technical communication 

3. To develop a sensibility and appreciation for some of the ideas, issues, and problems involved 
in writing about technology and in workplace writing. 

Contents Part I (HSS Faculty) Total –  07 hours (07 Lectures)  

Introduction to Communication – Introduction to Communication and the Importance of 
Communicating in English, Role of Emotions in Communication, Basics of Communication, 
Purpose and Audience, Cross-Cultural Communication, Language as a tool of communication, 
LSRW. (1 hour) 

Listening -Introduction to Listening, Types of Listening, Active Listening, Barriers to Listening, 
Listening to pre-recorded audio visual material/film. (1 hour) 

Speaking –Introduction to Speaking, Mock Personal Interviews, Body Language, Organizing and 
learning to make a presentation, Phonetics and Basic Pronunciation, Common Errors in English, 
Telephone Etiquette, Group Discussions.(2 hour) 

Reading - Purpose of Reading, Topic Sentence and its role, Reading for different purposes, 
Reading Comprehension, Reading Techniques. (1 hour) 

Writing– Introduction, Importance, Characteristics, Impersonal and Formal language, Elements 
of Style, Techniques for Good Technical Writing, Paragraph Writing, Writing a Formal Letter, 
Writing an Email, Plagiarism. (2 hours) 

 

Part II (Faculty of Engineering and Sciences) – 07 hours (07 Lectures) 

88 
 



Introduction to  Technical Communication 

Writing – Mechanics of Technical Writing, Organization and Structure in Technical Writing, 
Writing an abstract, Writing a Research Paper, Writing a Review, Report Writing, Writing 
Technical descriptions, Copyediting and formatting, Referencing, Citations, Plagiarism.(4 hours) 

Reading – Identifying Language Errors, Reading Comprehension with specific reference to 
passages/articles in Science and Technology. (1 hour) 

Lectures with Hands on Training – Grammarly, End note, Language software, Document 
processing using software.(2 hours) 

 

Reference Books 

1.Raman, Meenakshi and Sangeeta Sharma. Technical Communication: Principles and Practice. 
Oxford University Press: New Delhi, 2011. 

2. A Text Book of English for Engineers and Technologists. Division of Humanities and Social 
Sciences, Anna University, Orient Black Swan: Chennai, 2002. 

 

Online Course Material 

1.Technical English for Engineers-https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109106094/ 

 

  

89 
 



Title Ethics and Professional Life Number HSN7XX0 

Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 

Offered for M.Tech and PhD Type Compulsory 

Prerequisite None   

Objectives  

1. To help students identifying ethical responsibilities linked to their professions 
2. To assist students in analyzing professional decisions from ethical perspectives 

      3.   To help students cultivating professional integrity and moral ideals 

Learning Outcomes  

1. Students will be familiar with the manifold responsibilities attached to their professions 
2. Students shall be able toappreciate the role of normative principles in taking 

professional decisions  
3. Students shall be able to respond to ethical issues with integrity and creativeimagination 

Contents:  

1. Conceptual Foundations:  Why Should One be Moral?; Relevance of Professional Ethics; Tools 
and Techniques; Professional Codes; Normativity of Science and Technology   
        (2 hours) 

2. Professions and Moral Dilemmas:  Contemporary Ethical Issues (to be analyzed with the help of 
case studies and focusing on the nature of the group): 

Personal: Normative Numbness; Conflicts of Interests; Theft; Deception; Corruption; Partiality  

Interpersonal: Contracts; Violation of Rights; Consent and Dissent; Special Obligations; privacy and 
confidentiality 

Organizational: Fairness within the Organization; Hiring; Conduct at Workplace  

Social: Norms for a Game Changer; IPR; Reliability of Research Findings; Risk Assessment; Animal 
and Human Experimentation      (09 hours) 

3. Professional Responsibility: Individual and Collective Responsibility; Corporate Social 
Responsibility; Rectificatory Issues; Sustainability     (3 hours) 

 

Text Books: 

1. Ethical Issues in Professional Life, Callahan, J., Oxford University Press, 1998.  

2. Philosophy of Technology and Engineering Sciences, Meijers, A., Elsevier, 2009 

 

 

90 
 



Title Cine-Politics under the National Emergency Number HSL7XX0 

Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 

Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech. and Ph.D. Programs  Type Elective 

Prerequisite None    

Objectives  

1.To help students explore the intricacies of cultural forms and practices in the  
larger context of the political lives of the Indian nation 

2.To help students become familiar with some of the most significant events in the 
history of post-independence India through the prism of film history and state policy 

3.To make students familiar with conceptual apparatuses in cinema studies and with 
the overlaps between political and cultural histories 

 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1.Read archival and other materials that are relevant for history-writing 

2.Explore associations between public institutions, national history, mass and avant-
garde culture and the ever-changing socio-politico-cultural dynamics 

3.Develop acquaintance with contemporary scholarly writings on Indian history, 
cinema and politics  

 

Contents  

Introducing Emergency and its Politics–The National Emergency, historical trajectory, 
relevance in Indian politics, literature review (6 lectures)  

Cinema, Cine-Politics and Cultural Politics– Defining Cine-Politics, Nation-Industry 
negotiations, carrying out cine-archival research, reading of film industry and film 
society materials/publications, review of relevant theoretical schools in Indian 
cinema studies (12 lectures)     

Sponsorship and Censorship: the Indian New Wave and Other Cinemas- Censorship, 
Prime Minister‟s 20-point program, role of I&B ministry, industrial responses, Indian 
New Wave and state-sponsored cinema in the 1970s, debates on sponsorship and 
film economy (12 lectures)  

Globalization of the Dictatorial in the 1970s: Digital Remembering– The idea of the 
dictatorial, ideological associations between global dictatorial regimes, cine-cultural 
evidence and responses, archiving of evidence in the days of the digital, conclusion 
(12 lectures)  

 

91 
 



Textbooks 

1. Rajadhyaksha, Ashish. Indian Cinema in the Time of Celluloid: From Bollywood to 
the Emergency. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2009.  

Reference Book 

1. Joshi, Priya, and Rajinder Dudrah, eds. The 1970s and Its Legacies in India’s 
Cinemas. New York: Routledge, 2014.  

Online Course Material 

1. https://indiancine.ma/ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

92 
 



Title Sociology of Science and Technology Number HSL7XX0 

Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 

Offered for B. Tech, M.Tech and Ph. D. Type Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  

1. To help students conceptualize science and technology as embedded in culture, 
politics and sociality and understand how technical knowledge is produced in 
society.  

2. To help students explore the dynamic relationship between technology and 
society and discover how technology and society influence each other. 

3. To make students conversant with important and new concepts in science and 
technology studies in social anthropology.  

Learning Outcomes  

1.Comprehend technological progress as a social process  

2.Find connections between science, technology and culture and think beyond 
simple binaries like „natural‟ and „social‟ sciences and „nature‟ and „culture‟. 

3.Develop sensitivity towards an inclusive, sustainable use of technology and 
appreciate the significance of diversity in science studies  

Contents  

Introduction to the Sociology of Science – Introduction to the subject, its founding 
concepts and traditions, methods of doing STS studies, History of Science and its 
philosophical traditions – logical positivism,  falsification and its critique (5 lectures) 

Methodology of Science and its social connections - Structure of scientific revolutions, 
Ethics and ethos in science and deviance in practice of science, the Matthew Effect, 
and practicing „agnostic‟ science, scientific inventions as cultural capital, social life of 
scientists. (8 lectures)   

Social Construction of Science - Methods of representation in science, Ethnography of a 
laboratory, social construction of „realities‟, social construction of nature, Effect of 
social understanding of race and gender on production of scientific knowledge (9 
lectures) 

STS as Social Science – Actor Network theory, Pasteurization and the world of non-
humans, influence of science studies on social sciences, ecological understanding of 
the world, towards an inclusive understanding of the universe through STS.(8 
lectures) 

Technology and New Media – Technology as applied science, Gaming as culture, 
Hacking as counter-culture, Social media, Algorithms as social documents (8 
lectures) 

Science and Technology in India- Science & Technology in Colonial India, Development 

93 
 



of Indian Science, Science and Governance in India (4 lectures) 

Textbooks 

1.Sismondo, S. (2010), An Introduction to Science and Technology Studies, 2nd 
Edition, Wiley Blackwell 

2.Miller, D. et. al. edited (2012), Digital Anthropology, Berg. 

Reference Book 

Felt U., Fouche, R. et. al. edited (2017), The Handbook of Science and Technology 
Studies, MIT Press 

Online Course Material 

1. Mallick, S.Science, Technology and Society, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
HSS, IIT Guwahati, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_hs26/preview 

2. Mishra, A.Sociology of Science, NPTEL Course Material, Department of HSS, Indian 
Institute of Technology Roorkee, https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_hs09/preview 

 

 

  

94 
 



Title Digital Society  Number HSL7XX0 

Department Humanities and Social Sciences L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech., M.Sc., M.Tech, Ph.D. Type Elective 

Prerequisite None   

Objectives  

The Instructor will: 

Introduce students to the dominant discourses that frame debates on digital society  

Familiarize students with the literature pertaining to web technologies and their 
cultural, legal and ethical formations and practices 

Familiarize students with the complex relationships between digital cultures and 
digital divides 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

Identify the ways in which digital media shape identity 

Utilize new opportunities for meaningful data collection from and using sophisticated 
forms of artificial intelligence 

Identify knowledge and truth amongst the abundance of information 

Contents  

Introduction to Digital Society: Digital components of a connected society(2 
Lectures) 

Theorizing Digital Society: New forms of power; Data as sociomaterial objects; 
Archives; Digital veillance (6 Lectures) 

Digital Identities and Relationships: Self and the Digital Society; Embodied 
Identities in Digital Society; Bias and Privilege – Digital Inequalities; Marginalised 
Histories; Cyborgs(6 Lectures) 

Digital Spaces and Practices: Rethinking space and surveillance in digital societies; 
Gender, Space, and Place in Digital Societies; Urban Informatics and Sociological 
Imagination - Smart cities; Digital Healthcare; Mobility in Digital Society; Digital 
Heritage (10 Lectures) 

Network Society: The Internet as a Network; Networks and the Cultural Imaginary; 
Inequalities in the Network Society; Information Capital; Interface Design for Diverse 
Populations (10 Lectures) 

Re-conceptualizing Research in a Digital Age: Information Management – Data 
Analysis Software; Large Digital Systems; Data protection and the politics of data 
privacy (8 Lectures) 

Textbook  

1. Lupton,D., (2015), Digital Sociology, London, New York:Routledge 

95 
 



2. Gere,C., (2008), Digital Culture, 2nd Edition, London: Reaktion Books Limited 

Reference Books  

1.  Bentkowska-Kafel, A., Cashen, T., and Gardiner, H. (Eds.) (2009), Digital Visual 
Culture: Theory and Practice, Bristol and Chicago: Intellect Books 

2. Karaganis, J. (Ed.), (2007), Structures of Participation in Digital Culture, Social 
Science Research Council, Columbia University Press 

3.  Tredinnick, L. (2008), Digital Information Culture: The Individual and Society in the 
Digital Age, Oxford: Chandos Publishing Limited 

Online Resources 

1. Digital Humanities Seminar Video Archive of the Open University, UK, 
http://www.open.ac.uk/arts/research/digital-humanities/videos 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

96 
 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Non Graded Institute Level Courses 

For 

 

M.Tech. and Ph.D. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

97 
 



Title Systems Engineering and Project Management Number OAL7XX0 

 

Department  L-T-P [C] 1-0-0  [1] 

Offered for M.Tech Program Type Compulsory
NGU 

 

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives 

Systems Engineering is an interdisciplinary approach and means to enable  realization of 
successful systems. It focuses on defining requirements and then proceeding with design 
synthesis and system validation while considering the complete problem including operations, 
performance, test, manufacturing, cost, and schedule.  

This course intends to help students to develop the capability of systems thinking by 
introducing basics of systems  engineering theory, methods, and tools through lecture and 
practice.  

Learning Outcomes 

After taking this class, you should be able to: 

 Develop a systems engineering plan for a realistic project. 

 Judge the applicability of any proposed process, strategy, or methodology for systems 
engineering  

 Apply systems engineering tools (e.g., requirements development and management, 
robust design, Design Structure Matrix) to realistic problems. 

 Know how to proactively design for and manage system lifecycle targets. 

 Understanding TRL and MRL concepts 

 Use project management tools 

 

Contents 

 Introduction - Terminology, Systems Thinking, Today‟s Challenges (1 L) 

 Requirements Elicitation,  Documenting System Requirements - Proper Specification 
Language, Depth of Definition (1 L) 

 Requirements Analysis - Context Diagrams, Functional Analysis, State Diagrams (2 L) 

 Requirements Validation - User Feedback Techniques, Requirements Reviews (1 L) 

 System Architecture - Subsystem Definition, Hierarchical Analysis, Design for Reuse, 
Interface Management (2 L) 

 Specialty Engineering - Producibility/Manufacturability, Reliability/Availability, 
Maintainability/Serviceability, Usability/User Interface, Design-to-Cost (2 L) 

 Managing Systems Engineering - Estimating, Planning, Tracking, System Engineering 

98 
 



Management Plan, Work Breakdown Structure, Technical Reviews (2 L) 

 Introduction to the concepts of TRL (Technology Readiness Levels) and 
MRL(Manufacturability Readiness level)  (1 L) 

 Course Project  ( 8 hrs of self-work corresponding to 2 scheduled contact hours) 

o Application of Systems Engineering Methodology to the Major Project (M.Tech)  

o Use of Microsoft Project as the software tool for managing their M.Tech project 

 

Evaluation 

Presentation of Systems Engineering Process of the Major Project 

 

Textbook 

 

1. Introduction to Systems Engineering by Ian Faulconbridge, Michael Ryan (Kindle 
Edition) 
Argos Press, 2015.  

2. Systems Engineering Fundamentals  
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/aeronautics...systems-engineering.../sefguide_01_01.pdf 

3. https://www.sebokwiki.org/wiki/Introduction_to_Systems_Engineering 
 

Web Resources 

1. https://www.coursera.org/learn/systems-engineering 
2. https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/aeronautics-and-astronautics/16-842-

fundamentals-of-systems-engineering-fall-2015/ 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

99 
 



Title Innovation and IP Management Number OAL7XX0 

Management of Innovation and IP 

Department OA L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 

Offered for All M. Tech and PhD students <Shall also be Type Compulsory 
considered for B.Tech Students> 

Prerequisite Not required   

Objectives 

This course is intended to familiarise students with basic concepts of IP, its 
relevance to innovations and their effective exploitation including emerging societal 
issues. 

The Instructor will: 

1. Highlight concept of Innovations and processes that leads to innovations. 
2. Illustrate the significance of IPR in the context of Innovations and Demonstrate 

how information in IP data bases are used to enhance quality of innovations. 
3. Explain how IP can be meaningfully Exploited in commerce and for benefit of 

society. 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1.  Use IP information as an effective resource for innovation. 

2.  Protecting innovations as IP.  

3.  Design IP strategies for protection of innovations and commercial exploitations.  

Contents  

Module I: Types of creations and innovations using the mind, Modes of IP protection of 
the output of the Human mind, Such as Patents, Design registrations, Trade Mark, 
Copyright, Trade Secrets, Geographical Indications. (5L) 

Module-2 : Searching IP databases to extract technical information for research. 
Concept of Patentable inventions. Evaluating Inventions for patentability and drafting of 
patent specifications. Procedures for patent applications and their examination. 
Introducing processes for Design registrations, Trade Mark, Copyright, Trade Secrets, 
Geographical Indications. (6L) 

Module-3 : Use of IP in Trade and Commerce. Societal issues. (3L) 

Textbook 

 

 

100 
 



 

 

Ph.D. Programme 

 

In 

 

Digital Humanities 

 
 

Offered by 

 

Digital Humanities 

 Inter Disciplinary Research Platform 

 

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

 

 

 

 
 

101 
 



Introduction 

 

The digital revolution of the 20th and 21st centuries has created new knowledge and 
spaces for humankind to evolve culturally with the construction of techniques and 
technologies. As a corollary, a new field of organised research emerged at the beginning 
of the 2000s examining the use and application of digital technologies in the humanities, 
liberal arts, social science scholarship, computer sciences, and beyond. Popularly nested 
under an umbrella term “Digital Humanities”, this area of scholarship takes a critical 
stance to examine the role, use, application, and impact of digital tools in our everyday 
life, our societies, economies, cultures, and governments. However, while the use of 
computational tools in social science and humanities work is not very new, the 
availability of a large body of cultural artefacts after the digital turn, as well as 
emergence of new kinds of digital objects and embodiments, has opened up several 
possibilities for social science and humanities research, practice and pedagogy using 
computational approaches. Very soon, the question of whether something is, or is not, 
„digital‟ will be increasingly secondary as many forms of culture become mediated, 
produced, accessed, distributed or consumed through digital devices and technologies. 
In other words, the field of Digital Humanities is expected to grow on 
interdisciplinaryrather than multidisciplinary principles. The research focus and pedagogy 
in this program emphasize many of the emerging epistemological questions on 
knowledge production about generating digital data from material objects, and on 
rethinking existing processes of knowledge production. 

 

Objective of the Program 

 

IIT Jodhpur is one of the pioneering institutes in the country currently offering an 
interdisciplinary doctoral degree in Digital Humanities. This doctoral program offers 
unique opportunities to redraw conventional disciplinary boundaries among the 
humanities, the social sciences, the arts, technology and engineering, and the natural 
sciences. Primary objectives of the program include (but are not limited to):  

 

1. Introducing and exploring a broad spectrum of perspectives on the Digital 
Humanities 

2. Developing familiarity with a range of Digital Humanities projects, as well as the 
ability to evaluate the tools and methods involved in creating and analysing those 
projects 

3. Critical and reflexive use of digital tools, technologies, and spaces by 
understanding that all technologies are complex and socially situated, through 
which humans make meaning 

 

Doctoral students opting for this program are expected to contribute towards integrating 
disciplinary approaches of the humanities, liberal arts, social sciences, and computer 
technologies, with cross-disciplinary theorising and research that can be avant-garde to 

102 
 



the field of Digital Humanities. Doctoral research in Digital Humanities shall be premised 
on project-oriented knowledge production, the practical application of methods, and shall 
involve interdisciplinary collaboration workflows. To enhance such collaborative 
workflows, the programme will actively involve academics and resource people from 
other institutes and universities across the country and internationally.  

Expected Graduate Attributes 

In depth understanding of the fundamental concepts of broad areas in Humanities, Social 
Sciences, and application areas of basic computational tools.   

1. Ability to undertake problems in multidisciplinary domains of Humanities, Social 
Sciences, Computer Sciences, Mathematics, and related disciplines. 

2. Skills to demonstrate basic principles of Humanities and Social Sciences through 
various application areas and analytical processes.  

3. Ability to make effective oral and written technical communication. 
4. Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics. 

 

Learning Outcomes 

1. Appreciate and critically discuss Digital Humanities projects in light of current 
methods and theoretical approaches to the field 

2. Explain how Digital Humanities methods and practices are applied in different 
disciplines 

3. Skillset to plan, develop, and evaluate a Digital Humanities research project 
4. Fundamental understanding of research tools to plan for and evaluate the 

effectiveness of Digital Humanities methods including a multitude of platforms 
such as social media and web tools. 

5. Understand what data mean in different contexts 
6. Capture, collect, and analyse a variety of data types related to Digital Humanities 

research project  
 

Program Structure and Credit Structure: 

Semester 1 Semester 2 

Electives* Electives* 

Semester 3 Semester 4 

DH799Ph.D. Thesis DH799 Ph.D. Thesis 

Semester 5 Semester 6 

DH799 Ph.D. Thesis DH799 Ph.D. Thesis 

Semester 7 Semester 8 

DH799 Ph.D. Thesis DH799 Ph.D. Thesis 

*The number of electives and credit structure are as per the Ph.D. norms of the 
Institute. Electives are to be chosen in consultation with the Coordinator, Digital 
Humanities. A maximum of one Self Study course may be included in the course 
curriculum.  

 

  

103 
 



List of recommended electives:  

 

Digital Humanities (IDRP) 
DHL7xx0 Fundamentals of Digital Humanities (3 credits) 

DHL7xx0 Digital Methods and Tools (3 credits) 

DHL7xx0 Selected Topics in Digital Humanities I (1 credit)  

DHL7xx0 Selected Topics in Digital Humanities II (2 credits)  

DHL7xx0 Selected Topics in Digital Humanities III (3 credits)  

DHD7xx0 DH Project (3 credits; L-T-P: 0-0-6) 

Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
CSL7xx0 Selected Topics in AI - I (1 credit) 

CSL7xx0 Selected Topics in AI – II (2 credits) 

CSL7xx0 Selected Topics in AI – III (3 credits) 

CSL7xx0 Natural Language Processing (3 credits) 

CSL7xx0 Introduction to Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality (3 credits)  

CSL7xx0 Data Visualization (3 credits)  

CSL7xx0 Machine Learning I (3 credits) 

CSL7xx0 Security and its applications (3 credits) 

CSL7xx0 Computational Linguistics (3 credits) 

CSL7xx0 Algorithms for Big Data (3 credits)  

CSL7xx0 Machine Learning with Big Data (3 credits)  

Department of Electrical Engineering 
EEL7xx0 Data Compression (3 credits)  

Department of Humanities and Social Sciences 
HSL7xx0 Sociology of Science and Technology (3 credits) 

HSL7xx0 Digital Society (3 credits) 

HSL7xx0 Cine-Politics under the National Emergency (3 credits)  

Department of Mathematics 
MAL7xx1 Statistics I (1 credit) 

MAL7xx0 Statistics II (2 credits) 

 

 

104 
 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

DH Electives 
  

105 
 



Title Fundamentals of Digital Humanities Number DHL7010 

Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech. (Cr>=100); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); Type Elective  
M.Tech. (Cr.>0); Ph.D. (Cr.>0) 

Prerequisite  None   

 

Objectives 

1. Introduce and explore a broad spectrum of perspectives on the Digital 
Humanities 

2. Develop familiarity with a range of Digital Humanities projects, as well as 
the ability to evaluate the tools and methods involved in creating and 
analysing those projects 

3. Critical and reflexive use of digital tools, technologies, and spaces by 
understanding that all technologies are complex and socially situated, 
through which humans make meaning 

 

Learning Outcomes  

1. Appreciate and critically discuss Digital Humanities projects in light of 
current methods and theoretical approaches to the field 

2. Explain how Digital Humanities methods and practices are applied in 
different disciplines 

3. Skillset to plan, develop, and evaluate a Digital Humanities research 
project 

 

Fractal Course Contents  

 

Fractal 1: Digital Humanities: Emerging Contours (DHL7011) 

 

Introduction: What is Digital Humanities, Evolution of classical disciplines into 
Digital Humanities 

Digital Cultural Heritage; Conceptualising DH projects; Interdisciplinary style of 
proposal writing [4 Lectures]  

Computational Humanities[3 Lectures]  

Digital Embodiment: Embodied Identities in Digital Society; Bias and Privilege – 

106 
 



Marginalised Histories; Cyborgs, Gender, Space, and Place in Digital Societies [4 
Lectures]  

Literature and Technology, Text Analysis, Data Visualisation [3 Lectures]  

 

Hands-on Exercises 

1. Identifying DH projects from traditional projects: Concrete examples and a 
range of approaches to DH from the traditional disciplines.  

2. Digital Humanities Project Critiques: Exploring the project goals, what type 
of data it used, how that data was found and/or transformed, what 
technologies were used, and why.  

 

References Books 

1. Gere, C., (2008), Digital Culture, 2nd Edition, London: Reaktion Books 
Limited 

2. Bentkowska-Kafel, A., Cashen, T., and Gardiner, H. (Eds.) (2009), Digital 
Visual Culture: Theory and Practice, Bristol and Chicago: Intellect Books 

3. Karaganis, J. (Ed.), (2007), Structures of Participation in Digital Culture, 
Social Science Research Council, Columbia University Press 

 

Online-course material 

Digital Humanities Seminar Video Archive of the Open University, UK, 
http://www.open.ac.uk/arts/research/digital-humanities/videos 

 

Fractal 2: Data and Knowledge representations (DHL7012) 

 

Introduction: Data Sources, Transcribing (Multimedia data), Conversation, 
Discourse Analysis [7 lectures] 

Knowledge Engineering: Ontological engineering, Representation of Ontologies, 
Common Logic, RDFS, Web Ontology Language (OWL), Topic Maps, Multimedia 
Web Ontology Language, Applications [ 7 Lectures] 

 

Hands-on Exercises 

1. Ethnographic data collection and analysis: A case study 
2. Ontology formation from Multimedia Data: A case study 

 

107 
 



References Books 

1. Christopher Joseph Jenks (2011), Transcribing Talk and Interaction: Issues 
in the Representation of Communication Data, John Benjamins Publishing 
Company. 

2. Russel, S. & Norvig, P., (2009), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 
Pearson Education 

3. S. Chaudhury, A. Mallik, and H. Ghogh (2016), Multimedia Ontology 
Representation and Applications, CRC Press. 

Online-Course Materials 

1. Knowledge Representation and Reasoning  
http://videolectures.net/ssll09_pagnucco_krr/ 

http://videolectures.net/eswc2018_rudolph_knowledge_representation/ 

 

Fractal 3: Digital Archives (DHL7013) 

 

Digital memory, Methods of archiving, Theorizing the archive, database [6 lectures] 

Exhibition, installation, audio-visual essays [4 lectures]  

Aesthetics of recreation/ Digital aesthetics, Digital Art [4 lectures]  

 

References Books 

1. Ernst, W., (2013), Digital Memory and the Archive, Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press  

2. Grau, O., Coones, W., and Ruhse, V. (Eds.) (2017), Museum and Archive on 
the Move: Changing Cultural Institutions in the Digital Era, Berlin and 
Boston: De Gruyter  

 

Online-course material 

1. https://indiancine.ma/  
 

  

108 
 



Title Digital Methods and Tools Number DHL7XX0 

Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech. (Cr>=100); M.Sc. (Cr >=30); Type Elective  
M.Tech. (Cr.>0); Ph.D. (Cr.>0) 

Prerequisite  None   

 

Objectives 

1. Introduce and explore avenues of new and emerging societal and cultural 
entities and methodologies in Digital Humanities.  

2. Provide a conceptual foundation that will allow students to engage critically 
with Digital Humanities research and methods. 

3. Provide basic training digital and computational tools and techniques that can 
enhance students‟ own research. 

Learning Outcomes  

1. Fundamental understanding of research tools that will help students plan for 
and evaluate the effectiveness of Digital Humanities methods including a 
multitude of platforms such as social media and web tools. 

2. Understand what data mean in different contexts 

3. Capture, collect, and analyse a variety of data types related to Digital 

Humanities research project  

 

Fractal Course Contents  

 

Fractal 1: Introduction to Data Science (DHL7XX1) 

 

Components of Fractal 1 from Introduction to Data Science (M.Tech DCS 
Program) 

Data preparation, Data pre-processing, Data Cleaning, Data Integration, Data 
Transformation, Data Reduction, Redundancy Removal, Data storage, Data 
Handling, Data Query, Data Representation and Exploration  

Text Books 

109 
 



1. Kotu, V. and Deshpande, B. (2018) Data Science: Concepts and Practice, 
Morgan Kaufmann.  

2. Saltz, J.S. and Stanton, J.M. (2017) An Introduction to Data Science, SAGE 
Publications.  

3. Kelleher, J. D., and Tierney, (2018) Data Science, MIT Press Reference Books  
 

Reference Books 

1. Moreira, J., Carvalho, A. and Horvath, T. (2018) A General Introduction to 
Data Analytics, John Wiley & Sons.  

2. Mayer-Schonberger, V. and Cukier, K., (2013) Big data: The essential guide 
to work, life and learning in the age of insight, John Murray Publications.  

Fractal 2: Qualitative and Quantitative Analyses (DHL7XX2) 

 

Introduction: Research Question, Research Design, an introduction to research 
methods in digital humanities and mapping the departure from traditional research 
methods [2 lectures] 

Overview of Research Methods: Quantitative data collection and analysis, Survey 
design and analysis; Interviews, focus groups and participant observation; 
Discourse and Content Analysis [3 lectures]  

Research Methods in Digital Humanities: Case Studies and projects in Digital 
Humanities; Research method as discipline - how digital humanities has been 
expanding through deployment of digital methods to study society, culture, 
philosophy and language [4 lectures] 

Techniques of data collection and analysis: Document Image Processing, OCR 
Techniques and its challenges, NLP Introduction, and its applications, Qualitative 
Analysis - Themes, Patterns, Coding using NVivo and MaxQDA [5 lectures] 

References Books 

1. Bryman, Alan (2014), Social Science Research Methods, Oxford University 
Press: Oxford. 

2. Levenberg, Nielsen, Tai, et. al. (2018), Research Methods for Digital 
Humanities, Palgrave Macmillan: New York.  

Fractal 3: Visualization Analysis and Design (DHL7XX3) 

Introduction: Design Effectiveness, Abstraction (Data and Task), Marks and 
Channels, Analysis and Validation [7 lectures] 

Interaction Design: Arranging data, Spatial data, Network and Trees, Map Color and 
Other Channels, Views, Applications, User Experience [ 7 Lectures] 

 

Hands-on Exercises 

110 
 



1. Visualizing Quantitative and Qualitative Data. 
2. Use case-based user experience design. 
 

References Books 

1. William Lidwell, Kritina Holden, Jill Butler (2010), Universal Principles of 
Design, Rockport Publishers. 

2. Tamara Munzner (2014), Visualization Analysis & Design, CRC Press. 
 

Online-course material 

1. Data Science and Visualization, Provided by Harvard University (HarvardX), 
https://www.edx.org/course/data-science-visualization-2 

2. NPTEL Course, Data Visualization in R, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106179/11 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

111 
 



Title Selected Topics in Digital Humanities - I Number DHL7XX0 

Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 

Offered for M.Tech. (Cr>=14)  Type Elective 

Ph.D. (Cr>0) 

Prerequisite None   

 

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of Digital Humanities 
 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of Digital 
Humanities 

 

Contents  

The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in Digital Humanities and 
may be updated according to the instructor. 

 

Textbook  

Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

 

Self-Learning Material 

Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

 

Preparatory Course Material 

Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

 

 

 

112 
 



Title Selected Topics in Digital Humanities - II Number DHL7XX0 

Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 

Offered for M.Tech. (Cr>=14)  Type Elective 

Ph.D. (Cr>0) 

Prerequisite None   

 

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of Digital Humanities 
 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of Digital 
Humanities 

 

Contents  

The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in Digital Humanities and 
may be updated according to the instructor. 

 

Textbook  

Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

 

Self-Learning Material 

Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

 

Preparatory Course Material 

Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

 

 

 

 

113 
 



Title Selected Topics in Digital Humanities - III Number DHL7XX0 

Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech. (Cr>=14)  Type Elective 

Ph.D. (Cr>0) 

Prerequisite None   

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of Digital Humanities 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of Digital 
Humanities 

Contents  

The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in Digital Humanities and may be 
updated according to the instructor. 

Textbook  

Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

Self-Learning Material 

Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

Preparatory Course Material 

Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

114 
 



 

 

 

 

 

DH Electives 
  

115 
 



Title Fundamentals of Digital Humanities Number DHL7XX0 

Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective  

Prerequisite  None   

Objectives 

4. Introduce and explore a broad spectrum of perspectives on the Digital 
Humanities 

5. Develop familiarity with a range of Digital Humanities projects, as well as the 
ability to evaluate the tools and methods involved in creating and analysing 
those projects 

6. Critical and reflexive use of digital tools, technologies, and spaces by 
understanding that all technologies are complex and socially situated, through 
which humans make meaning 

 

Learning Outcomes  

7. Appreciate and critically discuss Digital Humanities projects in light of current 
methods and theoretical approaches to the field 

8. Explain how Digital Humanities methods and practices are applied in different 
disciplines 

9. Skillset to plan, develop, and evaluate a Digital Humanities research project 
 

Fractal Course Contents  

 

Fractal 1: Digital Humanities: Emerging Contours (DHL7XX1) [1-0-0] 

 

Introduction: What is Digital Humanities, Evolution of classical disciplines into Digital 
Humanities 

Digital Cultural Heritage; Conceptualising DH projects; Interdisciplinary style of 
proposal writing [4 Lectures]  

Computational Humanities[3 Lectures]  

Digital Embodiment: Embodied Identities in Digital Society; Bias and Privilege – 
Marginalised Histories; Cyborgs, Gender, Space, and Place in Digital Societies [4 
Lectures]  

116 
 



Literature and Technology, Text Analysis, Data Visualisation [3 Lectures]  

 

Hands-on Exercises 

3. Identifying DH projects from traditional projects: Concrete examples and a 
range of approaches to DH from the traditional disciplines.  

4. Digital Humanities Project Critiques: Exploring the project goals, what type of 
data it used, how that data was found and/or transformed, what technologies 
were used, and why.  

5.  
References Books 

4. Gere, C., (2008), Digital Culture, 2nd Edition, London: Reaktion Books Limited 
5. Bentkowska-Kafel, A., Cashen, T., and Gardiner, H. (Eds.) (2009), Digital Visual 

Culture: Theory and Practice, Bristol and Chicago: Intellect Books 
6. Karaganis, J. (Ed.), (2007), Structures of Participation in Digital Culture, Social 

Science Research Council, Columbia University Press 
 

Online-course material 

Digital Humanities Seminar Video Archive of the Open University, UK, 
http://www.open.ac.uk/arts/research/digital-humanities/videos 

 

Fractal 2: Data and Knowledge representations (DHL7XX2) [1-0-0] 

 

Introduction: Data Sources, Transcribing (Multimedia data), Conversation, Discourse 
Analysis [7 lectures] 

Knowledge Engineering: Ontological engineering, Representation of Ontologies, 
Common Logic, RDFS, Web Ontology Language (OWL), Topic Maps, Multimedia Web 
Ontology Language, Applications [ 7 Lectures] 

 

Hands-on Exercises 

3. Ethnographic data collection and analysis: A case study 
4. Ontology formation from Multimedia Data: A case study 

 

References Books 

4. Christopher Joseph Jenks (2011), Transcribing Talk and Interaction: Issues in 
the Representation of Communication Data, John Benjamins Publishing 
Company. 

5. Russel, S. & Norvig, P., (2009), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 

117 
 



Pearson Education 
6. S. Chaudhury, A. Mallik, and H. Ghogh (2016), Multimedia Ontology 

Representation and Applications, CRC Press. 
Online-Course Materials 

2. Knowledge Representation and Reasoning  
http://videolectures.net/ssll09_pagnucco_krr/ 

http://videolectures.net/eswc2018_rudolph_knowledge_representation/ 

 

Fractal 3: Digital Archives (DHL7XX3) [1-0-0] 

 

Digital memory, Methods of archiving, Theorizing the archive, database [6 lectures] 

Exhibition, installation, audio-visual essays [4 lectures]  

Aesthetics of recreation/ Digital aesthetics, Digital Art [4 lectures]  

 

References Books 

3. Ernst, W., (2013), Digital Memory and the Archive, Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press  

4. Grau, O., Coones, W., and Ruhse, V. (Eds.) (2017), Museum and Archive on the 
Move: Changing Cultural Institutions in the Digital Era, Berlin and Boston: De 
Gruyter  

 

Online-course material 

2. https://indiancine.ma/  
 

  

118 
 



Title Digital Methods and Tools Number DHL7XX0 

Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective  

Prerequisite  None   

 

Objectives 

4. Introduce and explore avenues of new and emerging societal and cultural 
entities and methodologies in Digital Humanities.  

5. Provide a conceptual foundation that will allow students to engage critically 
with Digital Humanities research and methods. 

6. Provide basic training digital and computational tools and techniques that can 
enhance students‟ own research. 

Learning Outcomes  

4. Fundamental understanding of research tools that will help students plan for 
and evaluate the effectiveness of Digital Humanities methods including a 
multitude of platforms such as social media and web tools. 

5. Understand what data mean in different contexts 

6. Capture, collect, and analyse a variety of data types related to Digital 

Humanities research project  

 

Fractal Course Contents  

 

Fractal 1: Introduction to Data Science (DHL7XX1) 

 

Components of Fractal 1 from Introduction to Data Science (M.Tech DCS 
Program) 

Data preparation, Data pre-processing, Data Cleaning, Data Integration, Data 
Transformation, Data Reduction, Redundancy Removal, Data storage, Data 
Handling, Data Query, Data Representation and Exploration [14 lectures] 

 

119 
 



Text Books 

4. Kotu, V. and Deshpande, B. (2018) Data Science: Concepts and Practice, 
Morgan Kaufmann.  

5. Saltz, J.S. and Stanton, J.M. (2017) An Introduction to Data Science, SAGE 
Publications.  

6. Kelleher, J. D., and Tierney, (2018) Data Science, MIT Press Reference Books  
 

Reference Books 

3. Moreira, J., Carvalho, A. and Horvath, T. (2018) A General Introduction to 
Data Analytics, John Wiley & Sons.  

4. Mayer-Schonberger, V. and Cukier, K., (2013) Big data: The essential guide 
to work, life and learning in the age of insight, John Murray Publications.  

 

 

 

Fractal 2: Qualitative and Quantitative Analyses (DHL7XX2) [1-0-0] 

 

Introduction: Research Question, Research Design, an introduction to research 
methods in digital humanities and mapping the departure from traditional research 
methods [2 lectures] 

 

Overview of Research Methods: Quantitative data collection and analysis, Survey 
design and analysis; Interviews, focus groups and participant observation; 
Discourse and Content Analysis [3 lectures]  

 

Research Methods in Digital Humanities: Case Studies and projects in Digital 
Humanities; Research method as discipline - how digital humanities has been 
expanding through deployment of digital methods to study society, culture, 
philosophy and language [4 lectures] 

 

Techniques of data collection and analysis: Document Image Processing, OCR 
Techniques and its challenges, NLP Introduction, and its applications, Qualitative 
Analysis - Themes, Patterns, Coding using NVivo and MaxQDA [5 lectures] 

 

References Books 

 

120 
 



3. Bryman, Alan (2014), Social Science Research Methods, Oxford University 
Press: Oxford. 

4. Levenberg, Nielsen, Tai, et. al. (2018), Research Methods for Digital 
Humanities, Palgrave Macmillan: New York.  

 

 

Fractal 3: Visualization Analysis and Design (DHL7XX3) [1-0-0] 

 

Introduction: Design Effectiveness, Abstraction (Data and Task), Marks and 
Channels, Analysis and Validation [7 lectures] 

 

Interaction Design: Arranging data, Spatial data, Network and Trees, Map Color and 
Other Channels, Views, Applications, User Experience [ 7 Lectures] 

 

Hands-on Exercises 

3. Visualizing Quantitative and Qualitative Data. 
4. Use case-based user experience design. 
 

References Books 

3. William Lidwell, Kritina Holden, Jill Butler (2010), Universal Principles of 
Design, Rockport Publishers. 

4. Tamara Munzner (2014), Visualization Analysis & Design, CRC Press. 
 

Online-course material 

3. Data Science and Visualization, Provided by Harvard University (HarvardX), 
https://www.edx.org/course/data-science-visualization-2 

4. NPTEL Course, Data Visualization in R, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106179/11 

 

 

 

 

 

Title Selected Topics in Digital Humanities - I Number DHL8XX0 

121 
 



Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite DHL7XX0 Fundamentals of Digital Humanities   

OR 

DHL7XX0 Digital Methods and Tools 

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of Digital Humanities 
 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of Digital 
Humanities 

 

Contents  

The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in Digital Humanities and 
may be updated according to the instructor. 

 

Textbook  

Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

 

Self-Learning Material 

Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

 

Preparatory Course Material 

Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

 

  

122 
 



Title Selected Topics in Digital Humanities - II Number DHL8XX0 

Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite DHL7XX0 Fundamentals of Digital Humanities   

OR 

DHL7XX0 Digital Methods and Tools 

 

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of Digital Humanities 
 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of Digital 
Humanities 

 

Contents  

The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in Digital Humanities and 
may be updated according to the instructor. 

 

Textbook  

Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

 

Self-Learning Material 

Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

 

Preparatory Course Material 

Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

 

 

123 
 



Title Selected Topics in Digital Humanities - III Number DHL8XX0 

Department IDRP-DH L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Elective 

Prerequisite DHL7XX0 Fundamentals of Digital Humanities   

OR 

DHL7XX0 Digital Methods and Tools 

 

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Expose the students to the latest upcoming fields in the area of Digital Humanities 
 

Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Apply the knowledge of recent topics to specific research areas in the field of Digital 
Humanities 

 

Contents  

The topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in Digital Humanities and may be 
updated according to the instructor. 

 

Textbook  

Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

 

Self-Learning Material 

Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

 

Preparatory Course Material 

Relevant Textbook and/or research papers to be announced by the instructor. 

 

 

 

124 
 



 

 

 

 

Ph.D. Programme 

 

In 

 

Quantum Information and Computation (QIC) 
 

Inter Disciplinary Research Platform 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

125 
 



Title Introduction to Quantum Number QCL6XX0 
Information 

Department IDRP (QC) L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide fundamentals of quantum information and computation 
2. Impart the knowledge of modeling efficiencies of a protocol in real experimental 

conditions 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Use the concepts taught in class to various aspects of quantum information, 
communication and cryptography 
2. Understand and appreciate the technological evolution at theoretical and experimental 
front in QIC 
 
Contents  
QCL6XX1: Quantum entanglement and non-locality [1-0-0] 
Quantum Entanglement, correlations and Separability: Review of linear algebra and 
basic laws of quantum mechanics, concept of bits and qubits, quantum gates, quantum 
parallelism, quantum algorithms, density operators and its applications 
Classical and quantum correlations, separability criterion, separable and entangled 
states, measures of two-qubit and multiqubit entanglement, Bell-type inequalities, 
discord (14 Lectures) 
  
QCL6XX2: Noise and Applications of Entanglement [2-0-0] 
Quantum Noise: Classical and Markov Processes, Quantum Operations, Examples of 
Quantum Noise and Quantum Operations, Applications of Quantum Operations, 
Limitations of the Quantum Operations Formalism (7 Lectures) 
Applications: Cryptography, quantum teleportation, dense coding, entanglement 
swapping, secret sharing, quantum games (14 Lectures))  

Effects of noise on quantum information and computation (7 Lectures) 
  
Textbooks 
1. Nielsen, M. A. and Chuang, I. L., (2000) Quantum Computation and Quantum 

Information, 10th edition, Cambridge University Press. 
2. Vedral, V., (2006) Introduction to Quantum Information Science, 1st edition, Oxford 

University Press 
 
Reference Books 
1. Griffiths, D. J., (2006) Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, 2nd edition, Pearson 

Prentice Hall. 
2. Bouwmeester, D., Ekert, A. and Zeilinger, A., (2000) The Physics of Quantum 

Information, 2nd edition, Springer. 
3. Bellac, M. L., (2006) A Short Introduction to Quantum Information and Quantum 

Computation, 1st edition, Cambridge University Press. 
Self Learning Material  

1. Goswami, D., Quantum Computing, Mathematics for Chemistry, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur 

     https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_cy07/preview 
 
 
 
 

126 
 



Title Quantum Computing Number QCL7XX0 
Department IDRP (QC) L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Impart mathematical framework of Quantum Computation to students familiar with 

basic concepts of quantum mechanics and quantum information 
2. Discuss advanced topics and State-of-the-Art research in quantum information and 

computation (QIC) 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Use the concepts taught in class to various aspects of quantum information,     
communication and cryptography 
2. Understand and appreciate the technological evolution at theoretical and experimental 
front in QIC 
 
Contents  
Mathematical Preliminaries: Quantum Mechanics, Matrix representations of quantum 
states and operators, Cauchy-Schwartz and Triangle Inequalities, Classical and Quantum 
Correlations (6 Lectures) 
Notions of Quantum Information: Classical and Quantum state Registers, Pure and Mixed 
states, Reduction and Purification of states, Quantum Channels, Completely Positive and 
trace Preserving Maps (6 Lectures) 
Entropy: Quantitative bounds on Shannon and relative Entropy, Von-Neumann and 
quantum relative entropy, Klein‟s inequality, Concavity and subadditivity of von 
Neumann entropy, Strong subadditivity of von Neumann entropy, Accessible 
Information, Holevo information (8 Lectures) 
Entanglement and Nonlocality: Separability Criteria, Classical, Separable and Entangled 
states, Local Operations and Classical Communications, Distillable entanglement and 
entanglement cost, Bound entanglement, Bell‟s Inequality and Nonlocality, Nonlocality in 
multiqubit Systems, Entanglement Measures (12 Lectures) 
Quantum Error Correction: Bit flip and phase flip codes, Quantum Hamming Bound, 
Calderbank-Shor-Steane codes, Gottesman-Knil theorem, Fault-tolerant quantum 
computation, quantum algorithms and cryptography (10 Lectures)    
 
Textbooks 
1. Nielsen, M. A. and Chuang, I. L., Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, 
Cambridge University Press, 2000 
2. Vedral, V., Introduction to Quantum Information Science, Oxford University Press, 
2006 
 
Reference Books 
1. Griffiths, D. J., Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, Pearson Prentice Hall, 2006 
2. Bouwmeester, D., Ekert, A. and Zeilinger, A., The Physics of Quantum Information, 

Springer, 2000 
3.  
Self Learning Material  
1.Goswami, D., Quantum Computing, Mathematics for Chemistry, NPTEL Course 
Material, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur 

     https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_cy07/preview 
 
 
 
 

127 
 



Title Facets  of Quantum Information Number QCL7XX0 
Department IDRP (QC) L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
 The Instructor will: 
1.   Provide an appreciation for the classical and quantum aspects of information theory. 
2. Help in developing an understanding of the exciting world of quantum computation 
and information 

  
Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Understand the fundamental principles of quantum information. 
2.   Appreciate  some modern applications of quantum mechanics. 
  
       Contents  
Review of basics of quantum information and computation (4 Lectures) 
 
Entanglement and Separability criterion, Entanglement measures, Purification and 
distillation, multi qubit entanglement, nonlocal correlations, multi qubit Bell-type 
inequalities (12 Lectures) 
 
Quantum Computation: Quantum logic gates; quantum Fourier transform; quantum 
algorithm; physical realization of quantum computers ( 8 Lectures) 
 
Classical Information and Communication: What is information and how can it be used? 
Concepts of communication channels; Shannon entropy; coding theory and 
communication complexity. (8 Lectures) 
 
Quantum Information: What is information theory from the perspective of quantum 
mechanics? Quantum entropy; quantum mutual information; fidelity. (6 Lectures) 
 
Some Unconventional Models of Computing: Brief introduction to cellular computation 
and communication; chaos based computing; DNA computing.  (4 Lectures) 

  
 
Textbook:  
 
1. Nielsen Michael, A. and Chuang  Isaac , I., Quantum Computation and Quantum 
Information,   Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
 
Self-Learning Material: 
1.Ghosh, D., Quantum Information and Computing, Indian Institute of Technology 
Bombay, https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115101092/. 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

128 
 



Title Quantum Cryptography and Number QCL6XX0 
Coding 

Department IDRP (QC) L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
 The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the students to the fascinating field of cryptography and coding, with 
specific emphasis on the quantum aspects of it. 
2. Highlight a number of facets of these theories having some parallel with the more 
familiar classical world. 

  
Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 
        1.Understand the fundamental principles of quantum cryptography and coding. 

 2.Become familiar with the modern aspects of the theory, including its experimental 
implementation. 
 
Contents  
What is cryptography? Various aspects of modern cryptography; number theoretic 
concepts. 
Classical Coding Theory: Concepts of entropy, mutual information and related aspects; 
Shannon's coding theorem.  (10 Lectures) 
 
Basic concepts of Quantum Mechanics: From the perspective of information and 
cryptography:  Hilbert space, states, operators: Hermitian and Unitary, simple 
measurements. (5 Lectures) 
 
Some basic no-go theorems: With implications to cryptography. (2 Lectures) 
 
Some basic applications pertinent to quantum cryptography: Entanglement, 
teleportation, dense coding. (6 Lectures) 
 
Various Quantum Cryptography protocols: Quantum Key Distribution protocols: BB84, 
B92, Ekert protocol, Goldenberg-Vaidman, counterfactual quantum cryptography; 
protocols of quantum dialogue; Quantum secret sharing protocol; Quantum cheating and 
cryptography; Protecting information and QKA (quantum key agreement); Shor's 
factoring algorithm and modern cryptography; Experimental progress in quantum 
cryptography. (15 Lectures) 
 
Quantum Coding: Quantum aspects of Shannon coding theorem. (4 Lectures) 
 

Textbook:  
1. Nielsen Michael, A. and Chuang  Isaac , I., Quantum Computation and Quantum 
Information,   Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
  
Self-Learning Material: 
1.MIT Open Course, 18.435J  “Quantum Computation”, by Shor. P.;  Fall 2003, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-435j-quantum-computation-fall-2003/ 
 

  

129 
 



 

 

 

Ph.D. Programme 

 

In 

 

Smart Healthcare 
 

Inter Disciplinary Research Platform 

 

  

130 
 



PhD program in IDRP Smart healthcare 

1. Introduction: 

The Smart Health Care IDRP aspires to create significant scientific and technological 
advancements in the area of Healthcare by bringing together a multidisciplinary team of 
scientists working in the interface of Biology, Chemistry, healthcare & Engineering. The 
research is intended to focus on designing and developing sustainable solutions for 
point-of-care health devices, drug discovery, affordable diagnostics, bio-compatible 
implants, and remote health care, including telemedicine. The IDRP platform is expected 
to support the development of various eHealth and mHealth based solutions for 
improving the quality of healthcare and making it available to large segments of the 
society. 

 

2. The major objectives are: 
 Augmenting existing methods for medical research using machine learning and 

artificial intelligence based approaches 
 Designing new and optimizing existing point-of-care health devices  
 Identifying novel methods for early diagnosis and personalized treatments 
 Creating a platform to use various electronic, mechanical, and bio-sensors for 

improving the remote health care facilities  

 

3. Expected Graduate Attributes 

Graduates will 

1. Be able to think critically and solve problems that are necessary for employment 
in biomedical, biotechnology, pharmaceutical industries, National research labs 
and Academic institutions at the global level. 

2. Develop a sense of ownership on the National missions for technology 
development, which will cater to societal needs in the area of affordable 
healthcare. 

3. Be exceptionally well trained in the laboratory enabling them to conduct high-
quality, reproducible research. 

4. Be able to read, understand and review intellectual property documents and 
recognize their rights. 

5. Be able to express their research ideas and present their data clearly in written 
and spoken format. 

6. Develop a strong work ethic and understand ethical considerations in biological 
research, which are both necessary for high-quality research. 

7. Develop healthy time management skills to plan and manage laboratory work as 
well as other miscellaneous research-associated demands on their time to 
effectively meet deadlines. 

131 
 



4.  Learning outcome: 

Graduates will 

• Be introduced to cutting-edge, interdisciplinary research areas like Diagnostics & 
Therapeutics development, Machine learning and Artificial Intelligence for 
healthcare, Novel drug development, Biomedical Instrumentation design,   
Biomedical Imaging& Image processing, Systems & Synthetic Biology, Biosensors 
and Biomaterials Engineering. 

• Be exposed to common problems that are prevalent in the domains of affordable 
healthcare such as sustainable point of care diagnostic devices, personalized 
medicine, remote healthcare, bioimaging for specific diagnosis, and medical 
devices & implants  

• Receive effective, hands-on laboratory training as a part of laboratory courses 
and short-term research projects that are designed to teach research 
methodology and common lab techniques. 

• Be introduced to Patents and other intellectual property documents, the rights 
that they grant and necessary considerations while filing patents / technology 
that is protected by patents. 

• Develop their research communication skills by participating in seminars, journal 
clubs; manuscript writing and research grant writing workshops. 

• Receive training on building a work ethic by being a part of research groups 
working towards a common goal. Graduates will also appreciate the ethical and 
safety considerations while conducting biomedical research. 

• Be taught how to prioritize items on their schedule and how to budget time across 
the spectrum of activities including research and other necessary tasks. 

5. Essential Topic clouds 

Drug  Point of care Systems Artificial Biomedical 
diagnostic device Biology Intelligence & devices & 

Development Machine implants 
learning 

Searching Sensor materials Immuno- Machine learning Tissue 
Microbiomes for technology engineering 

novel antimicrobials  Artificial 
 Intelligence  

 Biomarkers 
Disease Biomechanics 

Organic synthesis  processes 
diagnostics  

 Biomolecular 
therapeutics 

interactions Artificial Organs 
Drug screening &  

testing   

Synthetic Biology 
Surface 

132 
 



 functionalization  Biomaterials 

Animal Models  Vaccine  
development 

 Sensor 
development  

Personalized 
medicine  Identification of 

novel biomarkers 
 Qualitative and 

Quantitative Assay  
AI for healthcare 

 Understanding 
 disease 

Biosignals development 
 

 
 

Biosignal 
Processing 

 
 

6. Program Structure 

Cat Course Title L-T-P Credits  Cat Course Title L-T-P Credits 

I Semester   II Semester 

 
PE Elective 1 3-0-0 3 PE Elective 1 3-0-0 3 

Elective 2  Elective 2 
PE 3-0-0 3 PE 3-0-0 3 

  

 
PE Elective 3 3-0-0 3 PE Elective 3 3-0-0 3 

 

PE Elective 3 3-0-0 3 PE Elective 3 3-0-0 3 

         

Total  12  Total (Graded + Non-graded) 12 

III Semester  IV Semester 

PE Elective 2-0-0 2      

133 
 



0-0-  
TH Thesis 10 TH Thesis 0-0-24 12 

20 

Total 12  Total 12 

V Semester  VI Semester 

0-0-  
TH Thesis 12 TH Thesis 0-0-24 12 

24 

Total 12  Total 12 

VII Semester  VIII Semester 

TH Thesis 0-0-4 2      

Total  2    

7. Credit Requirements for the degree 

Credit requirements 

Student with M Sc Students with M Tech Students with B Tech 

Course work credits 30 Course work 12 Course work credits 30 

Thesis 48 Thesis 48 Thesis 48 

 

 

 

 

 

  

134 
 



Courses 
(In addition to the courses mentioned below, a student can opt for any course floated in other IDRP 
programs relevant to the thesis) 

 
Title Software and Data Engineering Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives  

The Instructor will: 
1.  Discuss techniques to manage a large amount of data 
2.  Provide mechanisms to design and develop data-intensive computing systems 

 
Learning Outcomes  

     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design complex end-to-end data pipeline for data processing 
2.  Critically identify and use the tools for data handling and management 
3.  Use modern software technologies to design and develop data analytical systems 

 
 

Contents 
CSL7XX0Cloud Computing and Virtualization 1-0-0 [1] 
Basics of complex software design: Concept of modular software, microservices, 
communication, 4+1 architectural views and patterns (5 lectures) 
Cloud Computing: Architecture of cluster computing, design of data centers, open data center 
platforms, fault-tolerant system design (5 lectures) 
Virtualization: Type-1 and Type-2 virtualization, virtual machine, containers, dockers (4 
lectures)  
CSL7XX0Data Management 1-0-0 [1] 
Data Management: Structured data, relational database management, unstructured data, 
semi-structured data,  Nosql database management (mongodb), column database, graph 
database, XML, JSON, HDFS, Handling drift in data, sensor data reliability at software and 
algorithmic level, sensor data analysis techniques (14 lectures)  
CSL7XX0Data Intensive Processing Systems 1-0-0 [1] 
Data Intensive Processing Systems: Architecture of large scale data processing systems, 
Hadoop, Apache Spark, Storm, parallel data processing concepts such as map-reduce, directed 
acyclic graph, resilient distributed datasets, dynamic resource allocation, partial & shared 
computation, storage architecture  (14 lectures) 
 
Textbook  

1.  Bass L., Clements P., Kazman R., (2012), Software Architecture in Practice, 3rd edition, 
Addison-Wesley Professional 
2.  Martin K., (2017), Designing Data-Intensive Applications: The Big Ideas Behind Reliable, 
Scalable, and Maintainable Systems, 1st Edition,O'Reilly Media 

 
Self Learning Material  
1.  Tylor,R.N., Medvidovic,N. and Dashofy,E.M., (2014), Software Architecture Foundation: 
Theory and Practice, Wiley  

 
Preparatory Course Material 

1. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 
2. International Conference on Data Engineering  

 
135 

 



 
Title Algorithms for Big Data Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will:  
1.  Introduce some algorithmic techniques developed for handling large amounts of data.  
2.  Emphasize on both theoretical as well as practical aspects of such algorithms.  
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to:  

1.  Analyze existing algorithms as well as design novel algorithms pertaining to big data.  
 

Contents 
Sketching and Streaming: Extremely small-space data structures(4 lectures)  
 
Numerical linear algebra: Algorithms for big matrices, Regression, Low-rank approximation, 
Matrix completion (8 lectures)  
 
Compressed Sensing: Sparse signals, Linear measurements, Signal recovery (8 lectures)  
 
External memory and cache-obliviousness: Minimizing I/O for large datasets, Algorithms and 
data structures such as B-trees, Buffer trees, Multiway mergesort (8 lectures)  
 
Reference Books  
Markovsky I, (2014), Low Rank Approximation: Algorithms, Implementation, Applications, 
Springer 
Eldar Y C., Kutyniok G. (2012), Compressed Sensing: Theory and Applications, Cambridge 
University Press.  
 
Self Learning Material 
1.   Department of Computer Science, Harvard University, Algorithms for Big Data 
 
 
 
 
  

136 
 



Title Machine Learning-1 Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None    
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 

1.  Provide motivation and understanding of the need and importance of Machine Learning 
in today‟s world  

2.  Provide details about various algorithms in Machine Learning  
 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop a sense of Machine Learning in the modern context, and independently work   

on problems relating to Machine Learning  
2. Design and program efficient algorithms related to Machine Learning, train models,  

conduct experiments, and deliver ML-based applications  
 

Contents  
 
CSL7XX1: Introduction to Machine Learning: Supervised Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic regression (2 
lectures)  
Gradient Descent: Introduction, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Subgradients, Stochastic 
Gradient Descent for risk minimization (2 lectures)  
Support Vector Machines: Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel trick, 
Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels (4 lectures)  
Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests (2 lectures)  
Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural networks, SGD 
and Backpropagation (3 lectures)  
Model selection and validation: Validation for model selection, k-fold cross-validation, Training-
Validation-Testing split, Regularized loss minimization (1 lectures)  
 
CSL7XX2: Introduction to Machine Learning: Unsupervised Learning and Generative 
Models 1-0-0[1] 
Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality (1 lecture)  
Clustering: Linkage-based clustering algorithms, k-means algorithm, Spectral clustering (3 
lectures)  
Dimensionality reduction: Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, Compressed 
sensing (2 lectures)  
Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimator, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant Analysis, 
Latent variables and Expectation-maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning (5 lectures)  
Feature Selection and Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations, Feature learning 
(3 lectures)  
CSL7XX3: Introduction to Machine Learning: Computational Learning Theory and 
Deep Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Statistical Learning Framework: PAC learning, Agnostic PAC learning, Bias-complexity tradeoff, 
No free lunch theorem, VC dimension, Structural risk minimization, Adaboost (7 lectures)  
Foundations of Deep Learning: DNN, CNN, RNN, Autoencoders (7 lectures)  
Textbook 

1. Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben-David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From 
Theory to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press  
 

Reference Books  
1. Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill  
 
 

Self Learning Material  

137 
 



1.   Department of Computer Science, Stanford University,  
      https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

138 
 



Title Machine Learning II Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Machine Learning-1   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 

1.  Provide technical details about various recent algorithms and software platforms related 
to Machine Learning with specific focus on Deep Learning.  
 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.   Design and program efficient algorithms related to recent machine learning techniques,  
      train models, conduct experiments, and develop real-world ML-based applications and 
      products   

 
Contents  
CSL7XX1: Machine Learning II: Introduction to Deep Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Model Search: Optimization, Regularization, AutoML (4 lectures)  
Deep Networks: Attention layers, Gated CNNs, Graph Neural Networks (8 lectures)  
Applications: Neural language models (2 lectures)  
 
CSL7XX2: Machine Learning II: Representation Learning & Structured Models 1-0-
0[1] 
Representation Learning: Unsupervised pre-training, transfer learning and domain adaptation, 
distributed representation, discovering underlying causes (7 lectures)  
Structured models: learning about dependencies, inference and approximate inference, 
sampling and Monte Carlo Methods, Importance Sampling, Gibbs Sampling, Partition Function, 
MAP inference and Sparse Coding, Variational Inference (7 lectures)  
 
CSL7XX3: Machine Learning II: Deep Generative Models 1-0-0[1] 
Deep Generative Models: Deep Belief Networks, Variational Autoencoder, Generative 
Adversarial Network (GAN), Deep Convolutional GAN, Autoencoder GANs, iGAN, pix2pix, 
CycleGAN, Conditional GANs, StackGAN (14 lectures)  
 
Laboratory Experiments 
Overview of Deep Learning platforms such Tensorflow and PyTorch.  
 
Textbook 

1.Goodfellow,I., Bengio.,Y., and Courville,A., (2016), Deep Learning, The MIT Press  
 

Reference Books  
1. Charniak, E. (2019), Introduction to deep learning, The MIT Press.  
 
Self Learning Material 
1.   https://www.deeplearningbook.org/ 

  

139 
 



 
Title Artificial Intelligence I Number CSL7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 
1.  Cover various paradigms that come under the broad umbrella of AI. 
 
 
Learning Outcomes  

The students are expected to have the ability to:  
1.  Develop an understanding of where and how AI can be used. 
 

Contents 
Introduction (1 lecture)  
Propositional logic (8 lectures)  
Search: Uninformed strategies (BFS, DFS, Dijkstra), Informed strategies (A* search, heuristic  
functions, hill-climbing), Adversarial search (Minimax algorithm, Alpha-beta pruning) (10  
lectures)  
Predicate logic: Knowledge representation, Resolution (6 lectures)  
Rule-based systems: Natural language parsing, Context free grammar (3 lectures)  
Constraint satisfaction problems (4 lectures)  
Planning: State space search, Planning Graphs, Partial order planning (4 lectures)  
Uncertain Reasoning: Probabilistic reasoning, Bayesian Networks, Dempster-Shafer theory,  
Fuzzy logic (6 lectures)  
 
Textbook  

1.Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd Edition,  
      Prentice Hall 

 
Reference Books  

1. Research literature  
 

Self Learning Material  
1.   Department of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley,  
http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD52D2B739E4D1C5F 
2.   NPTEL: Artificial Intelligence, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105077/ 
 

  

140 
 



Title Artificial Intelligence II Number CSL8XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Artificial Intelligence-1   
 
Objectives  
     The Instructor will: 

1.  Cover modern paradigms of AI that go beyond traditional learning.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to:  

1.  Develop an understanding of modern concepts in AI and where they can be used. 
2.  Design, implement and apply novel AI techniques based on emerging real-world  
     requirements. 
 

Contents 
CSL8XX1: Artificial Intelligence: Probabilistic Reasoning and Knowledge 
Representation 1-0-0[1] 
Probabilistic Reasoning over time: Hidden Markov Models, Kalman Filters, Dynamic  
Bayesian Networks (7 lectures)  
Knowledge Representation: Ontological engineering, Semantic Networks, Description Logics  
(7 lectures)  
 
CSL8XX1: Artificial Intelligence: Making Decisions 1-0-0[1] 
Making decisions: Utility theory, utility functions, decision networks, sequential  
decision problems, Partially Observable MDPs, Game Theory (14 lectures)  
 
CSL8XX1: Artificial Intelligence: Reinforcement Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Reinforcement Learning: Passive RL, Active RL, Generalization in RL, Policy 
Search, Deep Reinforcement Learning (14 lectures)  
 
Textbook  

1.Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd Edition,  
      Prentice Hall 

 
Reference Books  

1. Yang, Q. (1997), Intelligent Planning: A decomposition and abstraction based approach, 
Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.  

 
  

141 
 



Title Mechanical Behavior of Materials Number MTL7320 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–2-0 

[4] 
Offered for M.Tech. and Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   
 
Objectives 

1. To provide background on the mechanisms of deformation in engineering materials, 
and on the evolution of material microstructure when subjected to mechanical 
stress during materials processing and engineering applications 

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Ability to design materials with improved mechanical properties and identify failure 
mechanisms in materials for engineering applications 

2. To measure important mechanical properties and correlate with the microstructure 
 

Contents 
Continuum Theory of Deformation: 3D-state of stress and strain, Mohr‟s Circle, Generalized 
Hooke‟s Law and introductory theory of elasticity, stress and strain invariants, Yield 
Criteria, Yield surface and normality (6 lectures) 
Defects in Crystals:  Vacancies and interstitials, edge, screw and mixed dislocations, 

Burgers vector, slip, cross-slip and climb, stress fields around edge and screw 
dislocations, strain energy of dislocations, dislocation-dislocation interaction: Peach-
Koehler force on dislocation, image forces, dislocations in different crystal structures (10 
lectures) 

Twinning in Crystalline Solids: Deformation twinning, geometry of twin formation, twin 
shape, stress requirement for twinning, twinning in HCP, BCC, and FCC crystals (4 
lectures) 

Fracture and Toughening Mechanisms: Theoretical fracture strength of a material and 
Griffith’s Law, modes of fracture, fracture toughness, G and R-curve, brittle and ductile 
fracture, toughening mechanisms in metals, ceramics, and polymers (8 lectures) 

Fatigue and Creep: Introduction to fatigue, stress and strain-life approach, cyclic stress-
strain curve, fatigue crack propagation, high temperature deformation, fatigue-creep 
interaction (8 lectures) 

Deformation of Polymers: Elasticity in dilute and semi-dilute polymer networks, nonlinear 
elastic deformation, rubber elasticity: Mooney-Rivlin and Ogden models (6 lectures) 

Laboratory Experiments 
Measurement of uniaxial monotonic stress-strain response of metals, ceramics, and polymers, 
Measurement of hardness via spherical and Vickers indentation and correlation with yield 
strength for ductile and brittle materials, The effect of grain size on mechanical properties, The 
effects of strain rate and temperature on yield strength, Recrystallization of cold rolled metals, 
Measurement of impact fracture toughness using Charpy/Izod impact test, Fracture surface 
interpretation,  Creep of a 60%Sn-40%Pb Solder wire at room temperature. 

Text Books 
1. Dieter, G.E. (1986), Mechanical Metallurgy, 3rd Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Company. 
2. Courtney, T. H., (2005), Mechanical Behaviour of Materials, 2nd Edition, Waveland 

Press Inc. 
3. Shetty, M. N., (2013), Dislocations and Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Prentice 

Hall India Learning Private Limited 
 
Self-Learning Materials 

1. Hertzberg, R.W., (1976), Deformation and Fracture Mechanics of Engineering 
Materials, John Wiley and Sons 

2. McClintock,F.A., and Argon,A.S., (1966), Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Addison-
Wesley. 

 

142 
 



Title Frontiers  in Organic Chemistry Number CYL7XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Pre-requisite    
 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Give an in-depth exposure to the latest advances in organic synthesis 
2. Inculcating in students a research-oriented approach towards solving synthetic organic 

chemistry problems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Advance their knowledge in strategizing and synthesis of complex organic compounds 
2. Systematically read, understand and interpret the research reported in journals 
3. Develop skills of scientific presentations and interpersonal skills  
 
Contents 
Protecting Group: Selectivity and requirement of protecting groups, protecting groups and 
their deprotection (5 lectures) 

Advanced Radical Chemistry: Radical substitution reactions, coupling reactions, radical 
mediated cyclizations, addition reaction involving radicals, radical chain reactions (5 
lectures) 

Cycloaddition Reactions: 1,3-dipolar cycloadditions, higher order cycloadditions, asymmetric 
cycloadditions. (5 lectures) 

Advanced Enolate Chemistry: Diastereoselective aldol reactions, Evan‟s chiral auxiliary, 
Ender‟s chiral auxiliary, diastereofacial selectivity, asymmetric aldol reactions, 
Organocatalyzed aldol reactions (7 lectures) 

Total synthesis of complex molecules: total synthesis of penicillin, estrone, sparteine, 
prostaglandins, synthesis of important pharmaceuticals (12 lectures) 

C-H functionalization and C-H activation: Transition metal free reactions, Pd, Cu, Rh  

catalyzed C-H activation reactions, remote C-H functionalization and activation reactions (8 
lectures) 

 

Text books 

1. Carriera, E.M., and Kvaerno,L., (2009), Classics in Stereoselective synthesis, Wiley-VCH 
2. Kurti,L., Czako,B., (2005), Strategic Applications of Named Reactions in Organic 

Synthesis, Elsevier 
3. Carey,F.A., Sundberg,R.J., (2007), Advanced Organic Chemistry, Part B: Reactions and 

Synthesis, 5th Edition, Plenum 

 

Reference books  
1. Hudlicky,T., and Reed,J.W., (2007) The Way of Synthesis, Wiley-VCH 
2. Nicolaou,K.C., and Snyder,S.A., (2003), Classics in Total Synthesis-II: Further Targets, 

Strategies, Methods, Wiley-VCH 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Punniyamurthy,T., Catalytic Asymmetric Synthesis, NPTEL Course Material, Department 
of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104103067/ 
 
  

143 
 



Title Theory and Applications of Number CYL6XX0 
Spectroscopic Techniques  

Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for  Type Compulsory 

 
Objectives 
 
The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce to theoretical background of spectroscopic methods along with their 
instrumentation and application.  

2. Enable students to use such methods whenever needed by giving hands on experience 
with available instruments in the institute. 

 
Learning Outcomes 
 

The students are expected to: 
1. Apply spectroscopic methods as analytical tool in chemistry, biology, material science, 

medicine. 
2. Operate various spectrometers available in the institute. 
 

Contents 
 
CYL6XX1: Electronic Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
Properties of electromagnetic radiation, interaction of radiation with matter, Stimulated and 
Spontaneous processes, Einstein coefficient, Rabi Oscillation, intensity of spectral line and line 
shape, Fourier Transformation, General understanding of spectroscopic selection rule. UV-vis and 
Fluorescence Spectroscopy: Basic principles, Laws of photochemistry, Jablonski diagram, Frank-
Condon principle, quantum yield expression and Stern-Volmer equation, FRET. (14 lectures) 
 
CYL6XX2: Infrared and Raman Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
Basic principle; Organic functional group identification through IR spectroscopy, IR and Raman 
activity. (14 lectures) 
 
CYL6XX3: NMR and EPR Spectroscopy [1-0-0] 
NMR Spectroscopy: Basic principle, Zeeman splitting, chemical shift and spin-spin coupling, 
introduction to AB, AX, AMX spin system, 1D 1H and 13C NMR for structure elucidation, 
Polarization transfer methods and NOE. EPR Spectroscopy: basic principle, Electron-nuclear 
hyperfine interaction, theory of first order EPR spectra, analysis of 1st Order spectra, example of 
EPR spectra of organic radicals and transition metal complexes.  (14 lectures) 
 
Textbooks 

1. Gunther, H., (1995), NMR Spectroscopy, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
2. Banwell, C. N., (1994), Fundamentals of Molecular Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Tata 

McGraw-Hill Book Company 
3. Lakowicz, J. R., (2006), Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, 3rd Edition, Springer, 

New York 
 

Reference Books 
1.Bernath, P. F., (2005), Spectra of Atoms and Molecules, 2nd Edition, Oxford University 

Press 

144 
 



2.Silverstein, R. M. and Webster, F. M., (2010), Spectroscopic Identification of Organic 
Compounds, 6th Edition, Wiley 

 
Self Learning Material 

1. Mangal Sundar, K.,  Introduction to Quantum Chemistry and Molecular Spectroscopy, 
http:// http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106083 

2. Trivedi, V. and Chaudhary, N., Bioanalytical Techniques and Bioinformatics, Department 
of Biotechnology, http:// http://nptel.ac.in/courses/ 102103044. 

3. Das, R., Principles and Applications of Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectroscopy, 
Department of Chemical Sciences, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106048/2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

145 
 



 
Title Principles of Drug Discovery Number BBL7XX1 

CSL7XX1 

CSL7XX2 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering and Computer L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [2] 
Science and engineering 

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite None   

 

Objective 

The Instructor will: 

1. focus on route of drug design and discovery 
Learning Outcome 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. understand the principles of drug design and development 
Contents 

BBL7XX1: Principles of Drug Discovery [1-0-0] 

(fractal 1)drug targets, pharmacokinetics, administration and dosing, drug testing: in 
vivo and in vitro, drug discovery: natural lead, synthetic lead, combinatorial 
synthesis, pharmacokinetics based drug design, chemical development, process 
development, toxicology, pharmacology, drug metabolism, clinical trials, 
commercialization (14 lectures) 

CSL7XX0: Machine Learning-1 [2-0-0] 

(fractal 2) introduction, gradient descent, support vector machines, decision trees, 
neural networks (14 lectures) 

(fractal 3) nearest neighbour, clustering, dimensionality reduction, generative 
models, feature selection and generation (14 lectures) 

Textbook 

1. Stromgaard,K., Krogsgaard-Larsen,P., Madsen,U., Drug Design and Discovery, 5th 

Edition, CRC Press  
Self-Learning Material  

1. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 

 

146 
 



Title Introductory Chemical Biology Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite None   

Objective 

The Instructor will: 

1. build fundamental concept of interdisciplinary science, specially chemical biology 
 

Learning Outcome 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understand the importance of interdisciplinary sciences and its applications in 
bioengineering fields 

 

Contents 

Introduction: background and definition of chemical biology, overview of chemical biology, 
allied fields and their link with chemical biology, overview of protein structure and 
protein-protein interactions (14 lectures) 

Biomolecular-drug interaction: key discoveries in the field of chemical biology, few 
examples and journey through those discoveries, the use of unusual amino acids to probe 
biomolecular conformation, the use of novel fluorescence probe and applications, sirna as 
therapeutics, small molecule kinase inhibitors, gtp analogues as potential regulators for 
microtubule dynamics (14 lectures) 

Imaging: applications of small molecule as a probe for in vivo imaging, chemical tools for 
perturbation of protein-protein interactions, chemical platforms for protein-protein and 
protein-nucleic acid interactions (14 lectures) 

Textbook 

1. Chemical Biology: From Small Molecules to Systems Biology and Drug Design (Willey), 
Editor(s): Profs. Stuart L. Schreiber, Tarun M. Kapoor and Günther Wess 

Nature Chemical Biology, 2010, 6, 847-853 

Self Learning Material  

None 

 

 

 

147 
 



Title Algorithms in Biology Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite Nil   

Objectives:  

1. To  develop  an  understanding of  the  main  algorithmic  approaches  used  in  solving 
computational problems that arise in the analysis of biomolecular data (such as 
DNA/RNA/amino acid sequences, mass spectra of proteins, whole genomes, or gene 
expression levels). 

Learning outcomes:  

The students are expected to: 

1.  Understand various algorithms related to biological data analysis.  

2.  Develop new efficient algorithm to solve biological data. 

Contents 

Algorithms and Complexity: What is an algorithm?, Biological Algorithm versus Computer 
Algorithms, The change problem, Correct versus Incorrect Algorithms, Recursive 
Algorithms, Iterative versus Recursive Algorithms, Fast vs Slow Algorithms, Big-O 
Notation, Algorithm Design Techniques, Tractable versus Intractable Problems (10 
lectures) 

Greedy Algorithms: Genome Rearrangements, Sorting by Reversals, Approximation 
Algorithms, Breakpoint: A different face of greed, A greedy approach to motif finding (10 
lectures) 

Dynamic programming algorithms: The power of DNA sequence comparison, the change 
problem revisited, the manhattan tourist problem, edit distance and alignments, longest 
common subsequences, global sequence alignment, local sequence alignment, alignment 
and gap penalties, multiple alignment, gene prediction. (10 lectures) 

Clustering and Trees:  Gene expression analysis, Hierarchical Clustering, k-means 
clustering, clustering and corrupted cliques, evolutionary trees, distance based tree 
reconstruction, Evolutionary trees and hierarchical clustering, small parsimony problem, 
large parsimony problem (7 lectures) 

Gene selection algorithms: SAM, eBayes, Limma, CFS, mRMR, MRMS [5 lectures] 

Textbook 

1. Jones N. C. ,Pevzner  P. A.  (2014), An Introduction to Bioinformatics Algorithms, MIT 
Press 

Reference Books1. Mitra S. and Acharya T. (2003), Data Mining: Multimedia, Soft 
Computing, and Bioinformatics, New York: John Wiley 

1.  Mitra S., Datta S., Perkins T. and Michailidis G. (2008), Introduction to Machine 
Learning and Bioinformatics, New York: Chapman & Hall/CRC Press. 

 

148 
 



Title Microbes as sensors Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 1-0-0 [1] 

Offered for  Type Compulsory 

Prerequisite    

 

Objectives 

1. The instructor will discuss the methods by which living microbes can be used as 
sensors. 

 

Learning Outcomes 

1. Students will have an ability to design live microbial based biosensors for 
sensing specific pollutants, marker for environment and/or health monitoring 

Contents 

Introduction: Advantages of using microbes as sensors, physical and chemical 
methods of microbial, immobilization. (4 lectures) 

Electrochemical microbial biosensor: Amperometric, potentiometric and 
conductimetric (5 lectures) 

Optical biosensors; bioluminescence, fluorescence, and calorimetric based sensors 
(2 lectures). 

Metabolism based: Microbial sensors based on analysis of oxygen reduction rate or 
carbon di oxide production rate. (3 lectures) 

 Textbook 

No textbook. The research papers will serve as the reading material and reference 
material 

Reference Books 

1. Brock, et al., (2012), Biology of Microorganisms, 13th edition Ben,jamin 
Cummings, Boston, MA. 

 

Online course material 

None 

 

 

149 
 



Title Immunodiagnostics and therapeutics Number  BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 

Offered for M.Tech. (MT) Program Type Elective 

 

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide an introduction to fundamentals techniques of clinical immunology and Immune 
based Diagnostics 
 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Immunology based diagnostics techniques for to create and 150nalyse diagnostics 
Contents 

Immunodiagnostics [14 lectures]: Selection of animals for immunological assays, 
Preparation of antigens, Immunization and methods of bleeding, Serum separation, 
Storage. Antibody titre by ELISA method. Double diffusion, Immuno-electrophoresis 
and Radial Immuno diffusion. Complement fixation test. Hybridoma technology and 
monoclonal antibody production. Lymphoproliferation by mitogen / antigen. 

Immunotherapeutics[14 lectures]: Active and passive immunization; Live, killed, 
attenuated, sub unit vaccines; Vaccine technology- Role and properties of adjuvants, 
recombinant DNA and protein based vaccines, plant-based vaccines, reverse 
vaccinology; Peptide vaccines, conjugate vaccines; Antibody genes and antibody 
engineering- chimeric and hybrid monoclonal antibodies; Catalytic antibodies and 
generation of immunoglobulin gene libraries 

Laboratory Experiments [12 experiments]: 

Immunoblotting for specific antigens, Dot blot assay, Blood smear identification of leucocytes 
by Giemsa stain. Quantification of Phagocytic activity, Separation of mononuclear cells by 
Ficoll-Hypaque. Immunohistochemistry (direct and indirect peroxidase assay), detection of 
Salmonella genus which causes enteric or Typhoid Fever by using qualitative slide 
agglutination test (Widal test), Detection of Treponemes responsible for veneral diseases such 
as  syphilis (VDRL) test, IgG Purification technique (Protein A Based, Spin Column) 

Textbook 

1.  R.A. Goldsby., Thomas,J.K., and Barbara,A, Osborne., Kuby Immunology, 
Freeman,2002, 6th Edition 

150 
 



2. Stanier, R. Y., General Microbiology, W.H. Freeman and Co., 2009. 

3. Pelczar, M.J., Chan, E. C. S., Krieg, N.R., Microbiology, Tata McGraw – Hill Education, 2001 

Reference Books 

1. Murphy, K., Travers, P., Walport, M., & Janeway, C. (2012). Janeway’s Immunobiology. 
New York: Garland Science. 

2. Madigan, M.T.,  Martinko, J.M.,  Brock, Biology of Microorganisms, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 
2006, 11th  Edition. 

Online Course Material 

1 NPTEL Video Lectures on  Essentials in Immunology by Prof. R. Manjunath, Prof. 
Dipankar Nandi , Prof. Anjali Karande, Indian Institute of Science Bangalore  
(http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104108055/) 

2. NPTEL Video Lectures on Cellular and Molecular Immunology by Prof. Sachin Kumar, 
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati  (http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102103038/)   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

151 
 



 
Title Flux Balance Analysis Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P 3–0–0[3] 
[C] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite Nil   

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Provide an introduction to flux balance analysis (FBA), reactions,  metabolites, & pathways, 
mass balanced linear equations, biomass reaction, how to create a stoichiometric matrix from 
reactions and metabolites, gene-protein-reaction associations, constraint-based modeling. 

Learning Outcomes 

The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Implement knowledge of important concepts related to the FBA 

2. To apply them to model the behavior of biological systems as well as develop strategies for 
manipulating them. 

Contents 

Flux Balance Analysis Overview: Overview, Formulation of Flux Balance Analysis [1 Lecture] 

Reactions, Metabolites, & Pathways: Identifying Metabolic Reactions and Metabolites (Gene-
Protein-Reactions), Desired Reaction Information, Genome-scale Reconstruction Reactions, 
Desired Metabolite Information, Genome-scale Reconstruction Metabolites, Metabolic Pathway, 
System Boundaries:Exchange & Transport Reactions, Genome-scale Metabolic Reconstructions, 
Reconstruction Process: 96 Step Protocol, E.coli Core Model [14 Lectures] 

Mathematical Representation of Reactions & Constraints: Creating A Stoichiometric Matrix, 
Genome-scale Metabolic Reconstruction [2 Lectures] 

Mass Balanced Linear Equations: How can we use the Stoichiometric Matrix?, Dynamic Mass 
Balance, The Conceptual Basis of Constraint-based Modeling, Role of Constraints, Flux 
Optimization [6 Lectures] 

Biomass Reaction: Biomass Precursors, E.coli Precursor Metabolites, Maintenance Energy 
Requirements, Biomass Reaction For E.coli Core Model, Biomass Objective Function, Formulation 
of Flux Balance Analysis, E.coli Core Model [8 Lectures] 

Calculating Fluxes: Cobra Toolbox, Matlab, Drawing Flux Values on a Map, Print Flux Values, 
Examples [8 Lectures] 

Flux Balance Analysis Toolbox: Methods in Constraint-based Reconstruction and Analysis [3 
Lectures] 

152 
 



 

Textbook 

1.Palsson B. O., (2006), Systems Biology: Properties of Reconstructed Networks, cambridge 
Press. 

Self Learning Material 

1. Utah State University, https://systemsbiology.usu.edu/syllabus.php 

Preparatory Course Material 

1. Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/noc/individual_course.php?id=noc18-bt22 

  

153 
 



Title Systems Biology in Personalized Genomics Number BBL7XX0 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P 3–0–0[3] 
[C] 

Offered for M.Tech Type Elective  

Prerequisite Nil   

Objectives 

The Instructor will: 

1. Illustrate “big-data” problems in personalized genomics by discussing recent publications 

2. Provide training in high dimensional biological data analysis 

3. Familiarize the participants with the use of statistical tools and principles for analyzing 
genomic/epigenomic data 

Learning Outcomes 

It will enable participants to utilize the methods presented in this course for analyzing biological 
data. The course introduces the current research challenges faced in the field of computational 
systems biology. 

Contents 

Course Overview and Introduction: Design Principles of Complex Systems, Introduction to 
Genomics and Systems Biology [2 lectures] 

Topological and Network Evolution Models: Small-World and Scale-Free Networks, Duplication-
Divergence, Complex Models of Network Evolution, Network Properties of Biological Networks [6 
lectures] 

Types of Biological Networks: Types of Biological Networks, Genes2Networks and Network 
Visualization, Sets2Networks - Creating Functional Association Networks, Genes2FANs - Analyzing 
Gene Lists with Functional Association Networks [4 lectures] 

Data Processing and Identifying Differentially Expressed Genes: Data Normalization, Univariate 
and multivariate methods for identifying differentially expressed gene sets  - Part 1, Univariate 
methods (SAM, Welch‟s t-test, LIMMA,) - Part 2, Multivariate method (Principal Component 
Analysis; Gene Set Enrichment Analysis; Supervised and unsupervised machine learning for data 
classification, including Clustering, SVM and KNN) [15 lectures] 

Analytical Tools for Genomics: Enrichment Analysis and Enrichr, GEO2Enrichr: A Google Chrome 
Extension for Gene Set Extraction and Enrichment, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) - 
Preliminaries, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA), Principal Angle Enrichment Analysis (PAEA), 
Network2Canvas (N2C) and Enrichment Analysis with N2C, Expression2Kinases: Inferring 
Pathways from Differentially Expressed Genes, DrugPairSeeker and the New CMAP, Classifying 
Patients/Tumors from TCGA [15lectures] 

 

154 
 



Textbook 

1.    Ma'ayan A. and MacArthur B. D. (eds.) (2012), New Frontiers of Network Analysis in Systems 
Biology, Springer. 

Reference Books 

Research literature 

Self learning materials 

1. Mount Sinai Center for Bioinformatics, https://www.coursera.org/learn/network-biology 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

155 
 



Title Artificial Intelligence in Bioengineering Number BBP7XX0 
Lab 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 0-0-2 [1] 

Offered for  Type Open 
Elective  

Prerequisite Machine Learning-1   

Objective: 

The instructor will: 

1. prepare industry relevant advanced cross-disciplinary skills in machine learning 
applications in bioengineering. 

Learning Outcome 

The students will have an ability to: 

1. comprehend fundamental concepts and hands-on techniques of the state-of-the-
art data science and deep learning methodologies 

2. apply popular unsupervised learning methods, including clustering methodologies 
and supervised methods such as deep neural networks 

3. master techniques in modern data analysis to leverage big datasets from omics, 
image and sensors; use pyspark skillfully to analyze big data 

Laboratory Experiments 

Introduction: data types, big data processing using pyspark (3 labs) 

Machine learning applications: supervised and unsupervised techniques for omics 
data integration and analysis (4 labs) 

Deep learning: applications in omics, image and sensor data (7 labs) 

Textbook 

1. Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben-David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From 
Theory to Algorithms, Cambridge University Press 

2. Tseng,G., Ghosh,D., Zhou X.J., (2015), Integrating Omics Data, Cambridge 
University Press 

Self-Learning Material  

1. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 

https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 

Preparatory Course Material 

1. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/pyspark/ 

 

156 
 



Course Title Advances in Food Safety and Technology Course No. CYP6XX0 

Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Sc. (CY) Program Type Compulsory  
Pre-requisite   
 
Objectives 
 
The instructor will: 

1. Provide in-depth exposure of raw materials composition, consumer foods and fodder. 
2. prepare the students to analyze and improve the quality of foods. 
3. give knowledge on bio-active compounds, chemical and biochemical reactions, health 

effects and properties of food.  
 

Learning Outcomes 
The students will be able to: 

1. Understand properties and reactions of carbohydrates, lipids and proteins during 
storage and processing of food and how these influence the quality and properties of 
the food. 

2. Have knowledge on and be able to use food regulations. 
3.  

Course Content 
Introduction: general aspects of food industry, world food demand and Indian scenario, 
constituents of food, quality and nutritive aspects. Food additives, standards, deteriorative 
factors and their control, preliminary processing methods, conversion and preservation 
operation. (6 lectures) 
 
Energy Engineering in Food Processing - Generation of Steam, Fuel and Electric Power 
Utilization, Process Controls in Food Processing, Systems for Heating and Cooling Food 
Products. Thermal Properties of Foods, Modes of Heat Transfer - Freezing Systems, Frozen-
Food Properties, Freezing Time refrigeration system for food products. (6 lectures) 
 
Processing Systems: Microbial Survivor Curves, Influence of External Agents, Thermal 
Death Time, Spoilage Probability. Preservation by heat and cold dehydration, 
concentration, frying, irradiation, microwave heating, sterilization and pasteurization, 
fermentation and pickling, packing methods. (10 lectures) 
 
Separation processes in food processing- Electrodialysis Systems, Reverse Osmosis 
Membrane Systems, Membrane Performance, Ultrafiltration Membrane Systems, 
Concentration Polarization. Types of Reverse-Osmosis and Ultrafiltration Systems, Drying 
Processes, Dehydration Systems, Dehydration System Design,Sedimentation, 
Centrifugation, Mixing. (6 lectures) 
 
Production and utilization of food products - soft and alcoholic beverages, dairy products, 
meat, poultry and fish products, treatment and disposal of food processing wastes. (6 
lectures) 
 
Packaging-Introduction, Food Protection, Product Containment, Product Communication, 
Product Convenience, Mass Transfer in Packaging Materials. Innovations in Food Packaging, 
Food Packaging and Product Shelf-life, Food canning technology, fundamentals of food 
canning technology.Heat sterilization of canned food, containers - metal, glass and flexible 
packaging, Canning procedures for fruits, vegetables, meats, and poultry marine products. 
(6 lectures) 
 
 

157 
 



Textbooks: Fundamentals of Food Engineering by Stanley Charm. 
1. Introduction to Food Engineering - R. Paul Singh, Dennis R. 
2. Food microbiology: fundamentals and frontiers. 2nd ed. Washington (DC): 

American Society for Microbiology 
 

Reference Book:  
1. S. Damodaran, K.L. Parkin, and O. R. Fennema, Fennema‟s Food Chemistry, 

fourth edition, 2007, CRC Press 
2. Heldman, D.R., Food Process Engineering, The AVI Publishing Co; Westport, 1975 

 
Online Course Material 

1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103107088/ 
2. https://swayam.gov.in/nd2_cec19_ag04/preview 

 

 
 

158 
 



1. Introduction 

The rapidly urbanizing society and increasing quality of life demand reliable and intelligent 
infrastructure systems which are capable of catering to the societal needs at different scales – from an 
individual to the community level. Consequently, the civil and infrastructure industry has undergone 
profound changes and is constantly evolving. However, the new-age designs and innovations in the civil 
and infrastructure industry can only be driven by a group of engineering graduates having 
multidisciplinary training and a sound understanding of emerging technologies. Through this 
undergraduate program in “Civil & Infrastructure Engineering”, IIT Jodhpur is making a stride to re-
imagine the course structure that incorporates and integrates the elements of conventional civil 
engineering with advanced transformative technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI), cyber-
physical-systems (CPS), digital twins (DT), and automated management and information systems. 
Additionally, a major thrust is also planned on the design, implementation, and maintenance of large-
scale integrated infrastructure systems across different domains.  
 
  
2. Objective of the program  

To provide an expanded but holistic understanding of different civil and infrastructure systems and an 
in-depth understanding of the differences, similarities, and relations between different scales and 
components of it. 
To produce graduates with an ability to integrate conventional methods with emerging technologies to 
design intelligent civil and infrastructure systems from a multidisciplinary perspective. 
To provide exposure to techniques such as Internet-of-Things (IoT), machine learning, big data, cyber-
physical systems, and digital twin (DT) in the design and maintenance of different civil and infrastructure 
systems. 
 
 
3. Expected Graduate Attribute 
 
1. A strong foundation in the analytical, experimental, and computational methods to study various 

aspects of civil and infrastructure systems.  
2. A thorough understanding of green and sustainable materials, practices, and principles to design 

resilient infrastructure systems.  
3. An ability to understand real-world problems related to air and water pollution, solid waste 

management, ecological and environmental degradation, and their monitoring and remediation. 
4. Ability to adopt safe methodologies coupled with advanced technologies in the design and 

construction of civil and infrastructure systems. 
5. Ability to monitor and evaluate health of old structures and renovating to bring sustainability. 
6. An understanding of the use of digital twins (DT), cyber-physical-systems (CPS), internet-of-Things 

(IoT), artificial intelligence (AI) in designing, monitoring, surveillance and security of infrastructures. 
7. An innate ability to take multidisciplinary approach to problem solving and willingness to go beyond 

conventional paths. 
8. Ability to engage in ethical and responsible practices while pursuing professional growth. 
 
4. Learning Outcome 
 
1. Strong understanding of structural engineering and its application in reinforced concrete, prestressed 

concrete, and steel structure design. 
2. In-depth knowledge of geotechnical engineering for ground improvement and foundation 

engineering. 
3. Knowledge of pavement design, traffic planning, and highway design for urban transport 

management.   
4. Knowledge of critical experiments and advanced mathematical models for environmental engineering 

application. 
5. Knowledge of GIS and remote sensing for application in agriculture, environment, geo-resource 

exploitation, and constructing digital twin of built environment. 

1 
 



6. Knowledge of smart and sustainable material, and best practices for construction and infrastructure 
development. 

7. Strong foundation in computational methods and artificial intelligence (AI) for application in various 
civil and infrastructure problems.  

8. Knowledge of cyber-physical-systems, advanced visualization techniques, and digital twins for 
application in smart infrastructure.  

9. Knowledge of town planning, logistics and layout engineering 
 
5. New Skill Sets Targeted 
 
1. The following advanced and new skill sets have been targeted in the UG programme of Civil and 

Infrastructure Engineering at IIT Jodhpur: 
2. Capability to design and develop smart infrastructure systems integrating cutting-edge cyber-physical 

systems, and visualization techniques.  
3. A thorough understanding of geological and geotechnical engineering as applicable in infrastructure 

development, natural disaster risk reduction and resilience, and geo-energy extraction. 
4. Knowledge of best practices, methods, and materials for sustainable Infrastructure planning, 

construction, and management. 
5. Preliminary knowledge of monitoring, evaluation, restoration, and renovation of existing and old 

infrastructures and maintenance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 



6. Topic Clouds and Mapping of Topic Clouds with Proposed Courses (PC: Program Core; 
PE: Program Elective) 

 
   

Area Topics Courses 
 

 
Probability Spaces; Random Variables; 
Estimation and Test of Hypothesis; Stochastic Probability, Statistics, and 
Processes Stochastic Processes (LS) 
  

 

 
Geometrical Crystallography; Crystal Structure; 
Imperfections of Solids; Thermodynamics and 

Structure of Materials + 
Kinetics; Forms of Corrosion; Corrosion 

Corrosion + Polymers (IE) 
Protection; Structure-Property of Bulk Polymers; 
Viscoelasticity 
 

Foundation Courses 
 
Newtonian and Lagrangian Mechanics; Central 

Introduction to Analytical 
Force Problem; Variational Principles and 

Mechanics (LS) 
Lagrange’s Equations; Rigid body Motion 
 
 
Signal and Systems; Frequency Domain; LTI 

Signals and Systems (IE) 
System; Applications 
 
 
Basic Concepts; Energy Transfer; 
Thermodynamics Properties; Open and Closed 

Thermodynamics (IE) 
System; Second law of Thermodynamics; 
Entropy; Exergy 
 
Soil classification; index and engineering 
properties of soils; compaction and 

 
consolidation of soils; shear strength of soils; 

Geotechnical Engineering 
shallow and deep foundations; earth retaining 

(PC) 
structures  

 

 
Geotechnical 

Geotechnical Engineering 
Engineering 

Lab (PC) 
 

 
Rocks and minerals; Erosional and depositional 
processes of air, water, wind, and ocean; Seismic Geology for Civil Engineers 
hazard; Landslide hazard; Volcanic hazard; Site (PE) 
inspection; Engineering geology 
 

3 
 



 
In-situ densification methods; preloading and 

Ground Improvement 
dewatering techniques; mechanical and 

Techniques (PE) 
chemical stabilization of soils; grouting and 
geosynthetics  
Vibration theory; wave propagation; cyclic 
behavior of soils; seismic ground motion; 
dynamic soil properties; geophysical testing; Introduction to Soil 
seismic soil liquefaction; seismic microzonation; Dynamics (PE) 
seismic slope stability; seismic response of 
retaining walls 
 
Stresses and strains in soils; stress path for total 
and effective stress; critical state soil mechanics; 

Advanced Geotechnical 
load transfer mechanism of shallow and pile 

Engineering (PE) 
foundations; structural health monitoring of 
geotechnical structures; introduction to 
computational geomechanics 
 
Introduction, Evapotranspiration and 
infiltration, Runoff, Hydraulic analysis and 

Water Resources 
design, Dams and reservoirs, Role of economics 

Engineering (PC) 
in water resources planning, Irrigation, 
Groundwater 
 
 
Fluid statics, Kinematics of fluids, 
Incompressible Inviscid flow, Internal 
Incompressible Viscous flow, External Fluid Mechanics (PC) 

Water Resources 
Incompressible Viscous flow, Dimensional 

Engineering 
analysis and similarity, Turbulent flows, 
Compressible flow, Industrial Applications 
 
Water food industry nexus, transport from 
precipitation to groundwater, modeling 
hydrologic cycles; precipitation trends and 

Environmental Hydrology 
frequencies; Infiltration and soil Moisture 

(PE) 
Management; peak runoff and stormwater 
runoff; Streams; Floods and Hydraulic Control 
Structures; Detention and Retention ponds; 
ground water mapping 
 
Construction materials, Building construction, 

Construction Technology 
Building estimates, Introduction to project 

and Practices(PC) 
planning and network analysis 
 
 

Construction and Concrete materials; strength; durability; 
Infrastructure batching, mixing and transportation; curing; 

microstructure of concrete; mix design; 
admixtures; quality control; special types of Concrete Technology (PE) 
concrete. 
 

4 
 



Urban and rural infrastructure planning; risks 
Infrastructure Planning and 

associated; project governance; infrastructure 
Management Engineering 

maintenance; innovative infrastructure 
(PE) 

financing; polycentric governance 
 
Sources of wastewater; primary and secondary 
treatment methods; sludge characteristics; Air 
pollutants; Effect of air pollution of human 
health, vegetation, and materials; Pollution Environmental Engineering  
monitoring; Control equipments; Indoor air (PC) 
pollutions; Management of solid waste; 
Environmental Risk Assessment; Treatment of 
hazardous waste 
 
 
Sources and classification of air pollutants; Air 
Quality standards; Aerosol dynamics; Pollutant Air pollution and Control 
removal; Meteorology; Dispersion modelling; (PE) 
Effects of Air Pollution 
 
 
Mass balance; Reaction kinetics; Micro and 
macro transport processes; modelling of aquatic 
systems; Oxygen model; Temperature model; 

Mathematical Modelling in 
Gaussian plume model and modifications; 

Environmental System (PE) 
Dispersion models; Acid rain modeling, 

Environmental dissolved oxygen modelling and add reactor 
Engineering models 

 
 
Waste types; Sources of waste; Recycling; Waste 

Industrial Waste: Control 
to energy; Treatment and disposal of waste; 

and Utilization (PE) 
Nuclear, biomedical, and steel waste. 
 
Climate and Climate Change; Convection 
motion and Atmospheric circulations; Role of 

Climate change and Impact 
Oceans; Radiative Heat Transfer; Climate 

(Specialization stream core) 
feedbacks; Climate variability; Climate 
sensitivity; Global Circulation Model 
Photogrammetry; Multispectral remote Sensing; 
Thermal infrared Remote Sensing; Microwave 

Geoinformatics (PC) 
Remote Sensing; LIDAR; GPS; GIS; Application 
of GIS, Use of Drones 
 
Basics of Microbiology; Kinetics and Reactors; 
The activated sludge process; Nitrification and Environmental 
denitrification; Phosphorus removal; Drinking Biotechnology and 
water treatment; Anaerobic treatment by Bioremediation (PE) 
methanogenesis; Detoxification of hazardous 
chemicals; Bioremediation 
 
Introduction to transportation engineering, 

Transportation Transportation Engineering 
Transportation planning, Geometric design, 

Engineering (PC) 
Pavement engineering, Traffic engineering 
 

5 
 



 
Highway cross section elements and geometric 
design, Horizontal and vertical alignment, 
Intersection design, Traffic signs and road 

Highway Geometric Design 
markings – guidelines and principles, Pedestrian 

(PE) 
facilities, cycle track, Bus bays, Design layout for 
On-street and Off-street parking, Smart city 
roads 
 
 
Pavement materials, Analysis and stresses in 
pavements, Factors affecting pavement design, Pavement Engineering (PE) 
Design of pavements 
 
 
Urban transportation planning process and 
concepts, Travel demand estimation, Mode split Urban Transportation 
and route split analysis, Landuse- Planning (PE) 
Transportation models 
 
 
Road, user, and vehicle characteristics of traffic 
system; Traffic control devices; control 
hierarchy; ANN and Fuzzy logic concepts; 

Traffic System and ITS (PE) 
Intelligent Transport System (ITS); ITS user 
services; framework for planning, defining, and 
integrating ITS 
 
Stress and strain, Mechanical behaviour, Static 
analysis, Elastic bending, Elastic torsion Strain Mechanics of solids (PC) 
energy, Elastic buckling 
 
Working stress and limit state method of design 
of RCC structures; design of beam - singly 
reinforced, doubly reinforced beam; detailing of 

 reinforcement; serviceability criteria; design of Reinforced Concrete Design 

 slab - one way and two way slab; design of (PC) 
 column - axial loading, uniaxial bending, biaxial 
 bending, slender column; design of foundation - 
 isolated and combined footing. 
  
  
 Constitutive relations and compatibility 
 conditions; axial force, shear force and bending 
 moment; moment area method; conjugate beam 
 method; principle of virtual work; strain energy Structural Analysis (PC) 
 method; Maxwell-Betti law; force method; 
 energy method; three moment equation; 
Structural Engineering influence lines; cables, suspension bridges and 

arches; settlement and temperature effects. 
 
Indeterminate structures; force method of 
analysis; displacement method; stress and strain Advanced Structural 
tensors; plastic analysis; basics of FEM; stability Analysis (PC) 
of structure; introduction to structural 
dynamics. 

6 
 



 
Structural steel sections; design concepts - 
working stress design, limit state design; design 
of connections; welded connections; design of 

Steel Structure Design (PE) 
tension and compression members, concept of 
stability and buckling; design of flexural 
members; design against shear. 
 
 
Mix design of concrete; P-M, M-phi 
relationships; strut-and-tie method; design of 
deep beam and corbel; design of shear walls; Advanced Structural 
compression field theory; design against torsion; Design (PE) 
stability design of steel structures; torsional 
buckling; design of beam-columns; fatigue 
resistant design; fire rating. 
 
Mass-spring-damper system; equation of 
motion; Hamilton’s principle; single and 
multiple degree of freedom system; damped and Dynamics of Structure (PE) 
undamped systems; natural frequencies and 
modes; damping in structures; basics of 
earthquake response and vibration control. 
 
Governing equation and its solution 
approximations; calculus of variations; 
Lagrangian and serendipity elements; analysis 
of framed structures; axisymmetric problems; Finite Element Method (PE) 
3D stress analysis; analysis of plate and shell; 
numerical integration and convergence; 
application of FEM in dynamics. 
 
Types of prestressing; pre- and post-tensioning 
systems; losses in prestress; anchorage slip; 
analysis and design of members for axial, 
flexure, shear and torsion loading; deflection, 
camber and crack width; transmission of Prestressed Concrete 
prestress - pre- and post-tensioned members; Structure (PE) 
analysis and tendon profile of cantilever and 
continuous beams;   
design of composite sections, slabs, compression 
members etc. 
Prefabrication materials; modular coordination 
and standardization; site erection; quality 
control; prefabricated components; construction Prefabricated Structures 
of panel, roof and floor slabs, wall panels, (PE) 
columns, shear walls; design of cross section;  
joint flexibility and deformation; design of 
expansion joints; design for extreme loads. 
Review of structural dynamics; structural health 
management; vibration-based techniques for 
SHM; modal assurance criterion (MAC);  
damage localization and quantification; Introduction to Structural 
frequency domain decomposition (FDD); time- Health Monitoring (PE) 
domain damage detection methods;  
autoregressive (AR) and autoregressive with 
exogenous input (ARX) models; ANN approach 

7 
 



to SHM; predictive health monitoring; Bayesian 
model updating; piezo-electric materials; 
electro-mechanical impedance (EMI) technique; 
data acquisition systems; fibre-optics sensors; 
sensor optimization, placement and layout 
design. 
 
Source of earthquakes; response spectrum; 
frequency domain analysis; time domain 

Earthquake Engineering 
analysis; nonlinear earthquake analysis: 

(PE) 
earthquake resistance design; concepts of 
passive controls; geotechnical aspects. 
 
 
Algorithm analysis and complexity; Abstract 
Data Types; Search Trees; Heaps; Sets; Greedy Data Structure and 
Techniques; Sorting Algorithms; Hashing; Algorithm (PC) 
Dynamic Programming; Graph Algorithms 
 
 
Regression and Supervised Classifiers; Linear Introduction to Machine 
Decision boundaries; Unsupervised Learning; Learning (IE) 
Time Series; Artificial Neural Network  
 
 
Various infrastructure systems; need of smart 
infrastructure; data acquisition and applications; 
data analysis using AI and ML techniques and Smart Infrastructure 
their applications in infrastructure systems; Engineering (PC) 
control systems applications in infrastructure; 
design of smart infrastructure with adaptive 
capabilities. 
 

 Review of artificial neural networks - supervised 
 and unsupervised learning AI/ML in Infrastructure 
Smart Infrastructure networks; genetic programming; applications in Engineering (PE) 
Technology infrastructure engineering – prediction,  

structural control, damage assessment, ground  
settlement, uncertainty quantification, surrogate  
modelling etc. 
 
 
Classification of building services; Hot and cold 
water supply; Fire prevention and control; Gas 
and storage; Mechanical services; Heating and Building Services (PE) 
cooling; Electricity supply and distribution; 
Acoustics 
 
 
Intelligent architecture and Structure; BAS and 

Intelligent Buildings (PE) 
BAS communication standards; LAN; Light 

 
control and security; Smart and optimal control 
 
 Surveillance and Security of 
Introduction to surveillance, critical Infrastructures (PE) 
infrastructures, building security and control  

8 
 



system, surveillance and security of transport 
infrastructure 
 

 
Cyber-physical systems applications in civil Cyber-Physical Systems for 
engineering; instrumentation; wireless Infrastructure (PE) 
communications and networks; energy and  
power sources; stability and rick monitoring  
using CPS  
 
Digital twin types; Sensors, computation, and 

Digital Twin and Asset 
visualization; Standards and frameworks; 

management (PE) 
Application: construction, building, smart city, 

 
energy assets, transport, water 
 

 Design and simulation experiments for smart Smart Infrastructure: 
infrastructures Design and Simulation 

(Lab) 

 
Power plant infrastructure planning and design; 

 
hydroelectric infrastructure; thermal energy 

Introduction to Power 
infrastructure; pipelines in power infrastructure; 

Infrastructure Engineering 
nuclear energy infrastructure; smart grid, 

(PE) 
transmission and distribution. 

Thermal energy infrastructure; plant 
configuration; repair and maintenance; cooling; 
risk assessment; design of chimney; power plant Thermal and Nuclear 
waste – fly ash and its reuse; flue gas Power Infrastructure 
desulfurization; nuclear energy infrastructure; Engineering (PE) 
project implementation; radioactive waste and 
management; facilities and basic infrastructure. 

 
Railway operational system, design elements, 
and maintenance; High speed rails, elevated and 

 Infrastructure planning and 
underground rails; Airport system planning; 

 design for rail and air 
Airfield layout planning; Passenger and cargo 

Infrastructure Systems transport (PE) 
terminal planning; Airport-landuse 
compatibility planning 
 
Fundamental elements of planning harbours 

Infrastructure planning and 
and ports; Design of port and harbour 

design for ports and 
structures, Operations, management, and 

harbours (PE) 
maintenance of port infrastructures 
 
Functions and components of 
telecommunication; Design, operation, and 
maintenance of towers; Telecom network 

IT and Telecom 
management; Components of IT infrastructures; 

Infrastructure (PE) 
Network and servers; Network security; Role 
and applications of big data; Information and 
communication technology in urban services 
 
 Green Building and 

Sustainable Materials (PE) 

9 
 



Design; Assessment; sustainable site and 
landscape; energy and carbon footprint; Built 
environment hydrological cycle; Green 
materials; Indoor environmental quality; Green 
building economics 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 



7. Course Categories and credit distribution in the proposed B.Tech. Programmes 
 

S. Course Type Course Category  Regular B. Tech. Double B. Tech. 
N.  Cred Total Credit Total 

it  
1 Institute Core (I) Engineering (IE) 34 69 34 59 

 Science (IS) 16 16 
Humanities (IH) 12 9 

2 Programme Science (LS) 7 0 
Linked (L) 

3 Programme Core Programme Compulsory (PC) 50 71 50 71 
(P) Programme Electives (PE) 18 18 

B.Tech. Project (PP) 3 3 
4 Open (O) Open Electives (OE) 10 10 0 0 
5 Engineering Engineering Science Core (EC) 0 0 22 30 

Science (E) 
Engineering Science Elective 0 8 
(EE) 

Total Graded 150  160 
6 Non-Graded (N) Humanities (NH) 6 15 6 15 

Engineering (NE) 3 3 
Design/Practical Experience 6 6 
(ND)  

Total Graded + Non-Graded 165  175 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 



8. Credit Structure of B. Tech. Programme 
 

Distribution of contact and beyond contact hours 
Total credit 

Type L-T-P Contact Hours Beyond Contact Total 
(TC = TH/3) 

(CH) Hours (BCH) Hours (TH) 

1 Hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 1 

1 Hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 1 

1 Hour of Lab/Project 0-0-1 1 hr 0.5 hr 1.5 0.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 



9. List of programme compulsory courses 
 
Sr. No Course Name L-T-P Contact Hours Credit 

 
1 3-1-0 4 4 

Mechanics of solids 
 

2 3-0-0 3 3 
Transportation Engineering 
 

3 3-1-2 6 5 
Fluid Mechanics 
 

4 3-0-2 5 4 
Geoinformatics 
 

5 3-0-2 5 4 
Structural Analysis 
 

6 3-0-2 5 4 
Environmental Engineering 

a. Geotechnical Engineering 3-1-0 4 4 
7 

b. Geotechnical Engineering Lab 0-0-2 2 1 

 
8 3-0-2 5 4 

Water Resources Engineering 
 

9 3-0-2 5 4 
Reinforced Concrete Design 
 

10 3-0-0 3 3 
Smart Infrastructure Engineering 
 

11 3-0-2 5 4 
Advanced Structural Analysis 
 

12 3-0-2 5 4 
Construction Technology and Practices 
 

13 3-0-2 5 4 
Data Structure and Algorithm 

Total 52 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

13 
 



10. Area-wise Programme Elective (PE) Courses 
 

    
Area Courses L-T-P Credit 

Smart Infra structure       
Technology AI/ML in Infrastructure Engineering 3-0-0 3 

  3-0-0 3 
Building Services 
  3-0-0 3 
Intelligent Buildings 
  3-0-0 3 
Surveillance and Security of Infrastructures 
  3-0-0  
Cyber-Physical Systems for Infrastructure 3 
  3-0-0 3 
Digital Twin and Asset management 

Geotechnical   3-0-0 3 
Engineering Geology for Civil Engineers 

  3-0-0 3 
Ground Improvement Techniques 
  3-0-0 3 
Introduction to Soil Dynamics 
  3-0-0 3 
Advanced Geotechnical Engineering 

Environmental   3-0-0 3 
Engineering Air pollution and Control 

  3-0-0  
Mathematical Modelling in Environmental 3 
S ystem 3-0-0 3 
 Industrial Waste: Control and Utilization 

 3-0-2 4 
Environmental Biotechnology and Bioremediation 

Transportation  3-0-0 3 
Engineering Highway Geometric Design 

 3-0-0 3 
Pavement Engineering 
  3-0-0 3 
Traffic System and ITS 
  3-0-0 3 
Urban Transportation Planning 

Construction and  Concrete Technology 3-0-0 3 
Infrastructure 

 Infrastructure Planning and Management 3-0-0 3 

Structural Engineering  3-1-0 4 
Steel Structure Design 
  3-0-0 3 
Advanced Structural Design 
  3-0-0 3 
Dynamics of Structure 
 

14 
 



 3-0-0 3 
Finite Element Method 
 Prestressed concrete structures 3-0-0 3 

Prefabricated structures 3-0-0 3 

 3-0-0 3 
Earthquake Engineering 
  3-0-0 3 
Introduction to Structural Health monitoring 

  Environmental Hydrology 3-0-2 4 
Water Resources 
EInnfgrainstereurcintugr e Systems Introduction to Power Infrastructure Engineering 3-0-0 3 
 

Thermal and nuclear power infrastructure 3-0-0 3 
Engineering 

Infrastructure planning and design for rail and air 3-0-0 3 
transport 

Infrastructure planning and design of ports and 3-0-0 3 
harbours 

IT and Telecom Infrastructure 3-0-0 3 

Green Building and Sustainable Materials 3-0-0 3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 



11. Curriculum of B.Tech. Civil and Infrastructure Engineering (Regular) 
 
Cat Course LTP C NC GC Cat Course LTP C NC GC 

H H 
 I Semester   II Semester  

IE Engineering 2-1-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Mechanics to Electrical 

Engineering 
IS Chemistry  3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction 3-0-2 5 - 4 

to Computer 
Science 

IS Physics  3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction 3-0-2 5 - 4 
to 
Bioengineerin
g 

IS Chemistry Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1       
IS Physics Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1 0      
IS Mathematics I  3-1-0 4 - 4 IS Mathematics II 3-1-0 4 - 4 
IE Engineering 0-0-2 2 - 1 IE Engineering 0-0-2 1 - 1 

Visualization Realization 
NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - 

Design I  Design II  
NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - NH Communicatio 0-0-2 2 1 - 

Skill I  n Skill II  
NH Social Connect 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Social Connect 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 

and and 
responsibilities I responsibilitie

s II 
NH Performing Arts 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Performing 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 

I /Sports I  ArtsII/Sports 
II 

Total 11-2- 25 3 16 Total 12-1- 2 3 17 
12 14 6 

 III Semester  IV Semester 
LS Probability,Stati 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Structure of 3 ×  3 - 3 

stics and Materials 1-0-0   
Stochastic Corrosion 
Process Polymers 

IE Thermodynamic 3-1-0 4 - 4 PC Mechanics of 3-1-0 6  4 
s solids 

PC Geoinformatics 3-0-2 6  4 PC Fluid 3-1-2 6  5 
Mechanics  

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IE Signals and 3-1-0 4 - 4 
Machine Systems 
Learning 

LS Introduction to 3-0-0 3 - 3 IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Analytical 
Mechanics 

NE Intro. To 0-0-2 2 1  PC Data Structure 3-0-2 3 - 4 
Profession  and Algorithm 

Total 15-2-6 24 1 19 Total 18-1-6 2 - 23 
5 

 V Semester  VI Semester 

16 
 



PC Transportation 3-0-0 3  3 PC Water 3-0-2 5  4 
Engineering Resources 

Engineering 
PC Structural 3-0-2 5  4 PC Reinforced 3-0-2 5  4 

Analysis Concrete 
Design 

PC Environmental 3-0-2 5  4 PC Smart 3-0-0 3  3 
Engineering  Infrastructure 

Engineering 
PC Geotechnical 3-1-0 4  4 PC Advanced 3-0-2 5  4 

Engineering Structural 
Analysis 

PC Construction 3-0-2 5  4 PC Geotechnical 0-0-2 2  1 
Technology and Engineering 
Practices Lab 

IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3 PE Programme/O 3-0-0 3  3 
pen Elective 

NH Professional 0-1-0  1 - NH Professional 0-1-0  1 - 
Ethics I Ethics II 

Total 18-2-6 25 1 22 Total 15-1-8 2 1 19 
3 

 VII Semester  VIII Semester 
PP B. Tech. Project  0-0-6 6 - 3 IH Humanities IV 3-0-0 3 - 3 
PE/ Programme/Op 8-0-0 8 - 8 PE Programme/O 15-0-0 1 - 15 
OE en Electives / pen Electives 5 

OE 
IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3       
IS Environmental 2-0-0 2 - 2       

Science 
Total 13-0-6 19 - 16 Total 18-0-0 1 - 18 

8 
Total of Graded Credit  - 150 

Non-Graded Credit 9 - 
Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 

Grand Total   165 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 



12. B.Tech. with Specialization  

The students can obtain a Departmental Specialization after completing additional 20 credits beyond the 
regular B.Tech. program credit requirement. From the 20 credits, 8 credits must be taken from core areas 
of that specialization and 12 credits should be taken from the electives within that specialization.  
 
i. B Tech with Specialization in Environmental Engineering  

(Total credits: 20; Core credits: 8; Specialization Electives: 12) 
S. No. Core Courses Course Credits 

1. Fate of Chemicals in the Environment 3-0-0 [3] 
2. Climate Change and Impact     3-0-4 [5] 

 
S. No. Electives  Course Credits 

1. Remote Sensing and GIS for Environment Management  3-0-2 [4] 
2. Solid Waste Management  3-0-0 [3] 
3. Air Pollution and Control 3-0-0 [3] 
4. Advanced Wastewater Treatment 3-0-2 [4] 
5. Environmental Economics and Management 3-0-0 [3] 
6. Environmental Impact Assessment 3-0-0 [3] 
7. Machine Learning for Environmental Engineering. 3-0-0 [3] 
8. Geomorphology 3-0-0 [3] 
9. GIS and Public Health 3-0-0 [3] 
10. Environmental Biotechnology and Bioremediation 3-0-2 [4] 
11 Specialization Project (maximum 6 credits) 0-0-12 [6] 

 
ii. B.Tech. with Specialization in Smart Infrastructure 

(Total credits: 20; Core credits: 8; Specialization Electives: 12) 
S. No. Core Courses Course Credits 

1.  Cyber-Physical Systems for Infrastructure 3-0-0 [3] 
2.  AI/ML in Infrastructure Engineering 3-0-0 [3] 
3.  Smart Infrastructure: Design and Simulation 0-0-4 [2] 

 
S. No. Electives  Course Credits 

1.  Transmission Infrastructure 3-0-0 [3] 
2.  Thermal and Nuclear Power Infrastructure Engineering 3-0-0 [3] 
3.  Surveillance and Security of Infrastructures 3-0-0 [3] 
4.  Digital Twin and Asset management 3-0-0 [3] 
5.  Introduction to Power Infrastructure Engineering 3-0-0[3] 
6.  Infrastructure planning and  design for rail and air transport 3-0-0 [3] 
7.  IT and Telecom Infrastructure 3-0-0 [3] 
8.  Specialization Project (maximum 6 credits) 0-0-12 [6] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 



13. Detailed Course Contents 
 
Title Data Structures and Algorithms Number CS2XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech of all branches Type Program Core (PC) 
Prerequisite Introduction to Computer Programming   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
To introduce and practice the implementation of various data structures used for indexing, searching, and 
sorting operations. 
To introduce basic mathematical techniques for algorithm analysis and design. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
Ability to design and implement appropriate data structures for indexing, searching, and sorting operations 
for real-world problems. 
Designing of new algorithms using standard data structures. 
Analyzing the time and space complexities of standard data structures and basic algorithms 
 
Contents 
Algorithm analysis and complexity: Big/little -Oh, Omega, Theta notation, Recurrence equations (2 
Lectures) 
Abstract data types: Linear data structures, Tree, Binary trees, Tree traversal, Applications (7 Lectures) 
Search trees: Binary search trees, Balanced search trees, AVL trees, B-Trees (5 Lectures) 
Heaps: Binary Heap, Heap order property and min/max heaps (3 Lectures) 
Sets: Disjoint set ADT, Basic operations on Sets, Union/Find Algorithm (2 Lectures) 
Greedy techniques for algorithm design (1 lecture) 
Sorting algorithms: Bubble sort, Selection sort, Bucket sort, Insertion sort, Overview of Divide-and-conquer, 
Quick sort, Merge sort (6 Lectures) 
Hashing: Hash tables and operations, Hash function, Open and closed hashing, External and internal 
hashing, Collision resolving methods, Rehashing (5 Lectures) 
Dynamic programming for problem solving (3 Lectures) 
Graph algorithms: Definitions, Branch and bound, Backtracking, Representation, Traversal, Shortest-path 
algorithms, Minimum Spanning Tree algorithm, Topological sorting (8 Lectures) 
 
Laboratory  
Implementation of data structures using C programming language. 
Practically verifying and comparing run-time performance and asymptotic behavior of various data 
structures and related algorithms. 
Applications of data structures from real-life scenarios. 
 
Text Books 
M. A. WEISS (2002), Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C, Addison-Wesley, 2nd Edition. 
 
Reference Books 
T. H. CORMEN, C. E. LEISERSON, R.L. RIVEST, C. STEIN (2009), Introduction to Algorithms, MIT Press, 
3rd Edition. 
 
Online course Material 
Data Structures and Algorithms, NPTEL Course Material, Department Computer Science and Engineering, 
IIT Delhi: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102064/ 
 
 
 
 
 

19 
 



Title Structure of Materials Number MTL2XX0 

Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 

Offered for B.Tech. Type Institute Core – 
Engineering (IE) 

Prerequisite -     

Objectives 
1. Introduce the concept of crystal structure, atomic planes and directions 
2. Introduce the concept of atomic packing, coordination, and symmetry elements 
3. Introduce imperfections in solids 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the atomic arrangement in crystalline materials 
2. Describe the periodic arrangement of atoms in terms of unit cell parameters 
3. Identify various kinds of defects 
 
Contents 
Introduction: [3 lectures] Classification of materials, crystalline and non-crystalline solids, atomic bonding 
Geometrical Crystallography: [3 lectures] Symmetry elements: the operation of rotation, Proper and Improper 
rotation axes, Screw axes, Glide planes 
Crystal Structure: [4 lectures] Crystal Lattice, Unit Cell, Planes and directions in a lattice, Planar Atomic 
Density, packing of atoms and packing fraction, Classification and Coordination of voids, Bragg’s Law 
Imperfections in Solids: [3 lectures] Types of imperfections, Point defects: vacancies, interstitials, line defects, 
2-D and 3-defects, Concept of free volume in amorphous solids. 
 
Textbook 
Azaroff, L.V., (2001) Introduction to solids, 1st Edition, McGraw Hill Book Company 
 
Reference Books 
Callister Jr, W.D., Rethwisch, D.G., (2018), Materials Science and Engineering: An Introduction, 10th Edition, 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Prasad, R.,  Introduction to Materials Science and Engineering, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 

Materials Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113102080/ 

2. Subramaniam, A., Structure of Materials, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Material Science and 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113104014/  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 



Title Corrosion Number MTL2XX0 

Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 

Offered for B. Tech Type Institute Core – 
Engineering (IE) 

Prerequisite -   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce to different forms of corrosion 
2. Elucidate thermodynamics and kinetics of corrosion 
3. Teach different protection mechanisms against corrosion 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand corrosion under different environments 
2. Understand the thermodynamics and kinetics of corrosion 
3. Know protection methods against corrosion 
 
Contents 
Introduction and Motivation: [2 lecture] Economics, forms of corrosion, design, basics of Electrochemistry 
Thermodynamics and Kinetics: [6 lectures] Nernst equation, Pourbaix diagram, Rate expression, Exchange 
current density, Polarization, Tafel Equation, Mixed Potential Theory-Galvanization, Passivation, corrosion 
measurement 
Forms of Corrosion: [5 lectures] Major forms of corrosion (e.g. uniform, galvanic, crevice corrosion, stress 
corrosion, Hydrogen embrittlement, sulphate attack, etc.), Oxidation, Pilling Bedworth ratio, corrosion of 
steel, Al, and concrete, microbial corrosion 
Corrosion Protection: [1 lecture] Cathodic and anodic protection, Inhibitors, coatings 
 
Textbook 
Fontana, M.G., (2017) Corrosion Engineering, 3 rd Edition, McGraw Hill 
 
Reference Books 
1. Ahmad, Z., (2006), Principles of Corrosion Engineering and Corrosion Control, Elsevier 
2. Revie, W.R., Uhlig, H.H., (2008) Corrosion and Corrosion Control, 4th edition, Wiley 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Natarajan, K.A., Advances in Corrosion Engineering, 

Department of Materials Engineering, IISc Bangalore, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113108051/ 

2. Mondal, K., Corrosion I, Department of Material Science and 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/104/113104082/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 



Title Polymers Number CHL2XX0 

Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1-0-0 [1] 

Offered for B.Tech. Type Institute Core - 
Engineering (IE) 

Prerequisite -   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide basic background to structure and properties of polymeric materials 
  
Learning Outcomes 
1. The students are expected to have the ability to: 
2. Understand the basic classifications and synthesis of polymers 
3. Correlate the structure of polymers with properties 
  
Contents 
Background: [3 lectures] Terminologies, classification of polymers, Amorphous & semi-crystalline polymer, 
biopolymers, Functional group reactivity, classification of polymerization reactions 
Structure-Property in Bulk Polymer: [6 lectures] Glass transition, crystal structure, crystallinity and melting 
in polymer, mechanical properties-stress-strain relationship, Electrical properties: Dielectric properties, 
conduction in polymers 
Introduction to Viscoelasticity: [3 lectures] Mechanical models-Kelvin model, Maxwell model, Voigt model 
Applications: [2 lectures] Polymer composites, polymers for electronic packaging 
  
Textbook 
Young, R.J., and Lovell, P.A. (2011), Introduction to Polymers, 3rd Edition, CRC Press 
  
Reference Books 
BillMeyer, F.W., (2007), Textbook of Polymer Science, 3rd Edition, Wiley 
  
Online Course Material 
Adhikari, B., Science and Technology of Polymers, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Metallurgical & 
Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113105028/  
   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 



Title Introduction to Machine Learning Number CS2XX0 
Computer Science and Engineering / 

Department L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Electrical Engineering 

Institute Core – 
Offered for B.Tech of all branches Type 

Engineering (IE) 
Prerequisite Introduction to Computer Programming   
Objectives 
1. To familiarize with the fundamental machine learning algorithms. 
2. To study applications of machine learning algorithms in different disciplines. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Ability to formulate a machine learning problem 
2. Ability to select an appropriate machine learning algorithm for analysing different types of data. 
3. Ability to apply pattern analysis tools to practical applications and detect patterns in the data. 
 
Content 
Preliminaries: ML pipeline, training, testing, Learning Paradigms: Supervised, unsupervised, and 
reinforcement, Representation of samples, Correlation and covariance, probability, distributions, hypothesis 
evaluation, Data processing and normalization, Bias-Variance (8 lectures) 
Regression and Supervised Classifiers (18 lectures):  
Logistic and Linear Regression (2),  
Decision Tree, Boosting and Bagging, K-NN (5)  
Bayesian Decision Theory, MLE Parameter Estimation (5)  
EM-Algorithms (2 lectures) 
SVM (4 lectures) 
Linear Decision boundaries, Discriminant Analysis, and Subspace Representation (PCA) (4 lectures) 
Unsupervised Learning: K-means and Graph-based Clustering (3 lectures) 
Time series: Introduction to Time Series and Stochastic Processes, HMM (3) 
Artificial Neural Networks, Autoencoder, and CNN, Regularization Techniques (6 lectures) 
 
 
Laboratory Classes 
Programming labs on Normalization, Visualization (Visualization Tools: regression plots, scatter plot, 
tableau), Distribution, Evaluation, Regressions, Decision Tree, Bayes, PCA, LDA, ANN, K-means, Graph-
based Clustering, HMM.  
 
Case Studies from different departments 
BSB: Identification of protein secondary structure (helices, sheets, and coil), or functional categories 
representing binding sites, cleavage sites, or residues being posttranslationally modified using Neural 
networks.  
ME: Machine Learning for Predictive Maintenance, where sensed machine data can be used in learning 
whether routine maintenance of the machine is required or not: Classification problem 
Chemical Engg: Application of  ML to predict life cycle of Lithium Ion Battery. (Challenge: Even with the 
same chemistry and same operating conditions, there is considerable variability in the life cycle of the lithium 
ion battery.  
Materials: Finding unprecedentedly low-thermal-conductivity half-Heusler semiconductors via high-
throughput materials modelling, 
Civil Engg:  Applications in Transportation Systems, Environmental Pollution Prediction. 
 
Text Books 
Machine Learning, T. M. MITCHELL, McGraw Hill Education, 2017 
 
Reference Books 
1. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, C. M. BISHOP, Springer-Verlag New York, 2006 
2. Pattern Classification, R. O. DUDA, P. E. HART, D. G. STORK, Wiley-Blackwell, 2000 
 

23 
 



Online course Material 
1. Introduction to Machine Learning, NPTEL Course Material, Department Computer Science and 

Engineering, IIT Madras: http//nptel.ac.in/courses/106106139/  
2. Machine Learning, Stanford University: https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

24 
 



Title Probability, Statistics & Stochastic Process Number MAL2XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P [C] 3-1-0 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech BSBE, CSE, EE, DS&AI, CHE, CIE, ES Type Institute Core – 

Engineering (IE) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Demonstrate the basic principles of probability theory and random variables. 
2. Demonstrate the use of various families of probability distributions to model various types of data. 
3. Introduce the concept of stochastic process and its application 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Understand probability theory and develop the mathematical foundation of random variables. 
2. Understand random sampling, theory of estimation and testing of hypotheses. 
3. Understand the concept of stochastic processes and demonstrate the specific applications to Poisson and 

Gaussian processes. 
 
Content 
Probability Spaces and Random Variables [16 lectures]: Axioms of probability, conditional probability, 
Independence, Bayes’ rule, Random variable, Some common discrete and continuous distributions, 
Distribution of Functions of Random Variable, Two and higher dimensional distributions, Functions of 
random variables, Conditional distributions, Laws of large numbers, Central limit theorem. 
Estimation and Test of Hypothesis [12 lectures]:  Parameter Estimation, Maximum Likelihood Estimator [4 
lecture], Confidence Interval [2 lecture], Hypothesis Testing [6 lecture]. 
Stochastic Processes [14 Lectures]: Definition of Stochastic process, Classification and properties of stochastic 
processes, Simple Markovian stochastic processes, Gaussian processes, Stationary processes, Discrete and 
continuous time Markov chains, ergodicity. 
 
Text Books 
1. Ross, S. M.,  (2010), A First Course in Probability, Pearson Prentice Hall 
2. Ross, S. M., (2012), Introduction to probability and statistics for engineers and scientists, Elsevier 
3. Castaneda, L.B., Arunachalam, V. and Dharmaraja, S., (2012), Introduction to Probability and Stochastic 

Processes with Applications, John Wiley & Sons. 
4. Papoulis, A., (1991), Probability, Random Variables, and Stochastic Processes, McGraw-Hill. 
 
Reference Books 
Rohatgi, V. K. & Saleh, A.K.M.E., (2011), An Introduction to Probability and Statistics, Wiley 
Casella, G. and Berger, R. (2002). Statistical Inference, Cengage Learning 
Ross M.S., (2008), Stochastic Processes, John Wiley and Sons. 
Hoel, P.G., Port, S.C.  & Stone, C.J. (1986) Introduction to Stochastic Processes, Houghton Mifflin Company 
 
Online course Material 
1. G. Srinivasan, IIT Madras, Introduction to probability and Statistics, 

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111/106/111106112/ 
2. S. Dharmaraja, IIT Delhi, Introduction to Probability Theory and Stochastic Processes, 

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111/102/111102111/ 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 



Title Signals and systems Number EE2XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-1-0 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech  Type Institute Core – 

Engineering (IE) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor would: 
1. Familiarize students with the fundamentals of continuous-time and discrete-time linear systems, and 

their response analysis 
2. Provide understanding frequency-domain transforms and their real-world applications 
3. Discuss the applications from the area of engineering and physics 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Compute the response and system functions of LTI systems in various domains 
2. Solve basic real-world interdisciplinary problems involving time-domain or frequency analysis of 

signals 
 
Content 
Signals and Systems (Continuous and Discrete Time) [10 lectures]:  
Description and Classification of signals, signal operations in time domain, Sampling, Description and 
Classification of LTI System, Properties of LTI system, Impulse response, Convolution and Correlation. 
Frequency Domain Representation of Signals [12 lectures]:  
Fourier series representation of periodic signals, convergence of Fourier Series & Gibbs phenomenon, 
Fourier Transform, Fourier transform of periodic signals, properties of Fourier transform, Laplace 
Transform, Z-Transform, region of convergence & properties, Rational System functions, Inverse Laplace 
and Z-Transform of Rational Functions and applications. 
LTI systems [12 lectures] :  
Difference and differential equation representation, block diagram representation, Transfer function and 
convolution, poles and zeros, step response, Natural Response of 1st and 2nd Order Systems, Sinusoidal 
steady-state and Frequency Response. 
Applications: [8 lectures]:  
Applications from the area of condition monitoring, Predictive Operations and Maintenance, Process 
Control, ECG Signal Filtering and Denoising, Seismic Signal Processing, and few examples related to 2D,3D, 
and speech signal processing. 
 
Text Books 
Oppenheim, A. & Wilsky, A. S., Signals and Systems, 2nd Edition, Prentice-Hall 
 
Reference Books 
1. Lathi, B. P., (2009), Principles of Linear Systems and Signals, 2nd Edition, Oxford University Press 
2. Haykin, S. & Veen, B. V., (2008), Signals and Systems, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
3. Dutta Roy, S. C., Chandra, S., (2018), Circuits, Systems and Signal Processing: A Tutorials Approach, 1st 

Edition, Springer 
 
Online course Material 
1. Dutta Roy, S. C., Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Signals and Systems, 

https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLC6210462711083C4 
2. Venkatesan, K. S., Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Signals and Systems, NPTEL, 

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/104/117104074/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

26 
 



Title Thermodynamics Number MEL2XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-1-0 [4] 
Offered for All B. Tech Type Institute Core – 

Engineering (IE) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To understand thermodynamics laws and various thermodynamic processes 
2. To comprehend work producing and work consuming cycles 
3. To inculcate the importance of change of state responsible for physical and chemical changes. 
4. To introduce broader aspects of thermodynamics across disciplines and applicability of laws of 

thermodynamics and entropy principle in the areas ranging from design of prime movers to design of 
algorithms. 

 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to effectively apply laws of thermodynamics in the practice of engineering. 
2. Capability to assess and quantify thermodynamic efficiencies using the second law of thermodynamics. 
3. Ability to conduct comprehensive and rigorous treatment of classical thermodynamics while retaining 

an engineering perspective Content 
 
Content 
Implication of Thermodynamics and its scope in various disciplines [2 Lectures]: Mechanical engineering 
applications, Computer science applications, Electrical Engineering applications, Biological science 
applications, Chemical engineering applications. 
Basic concepts [2 Lectures]: Thermodynamic system, Properties, State, Process, Thermodynamic equilibrium, 
Pressure measurement, Zeroth law, Temperature measurement. 
Concept of energy and energy transfer [7 Lectures]: Work and Heat, Internal energy, First Law of 
Thermodynamics, Work transfer and its value for different processes, Heat transfer, state functions,  Equation 
of state for ideal and real gases, Gas mixtures; Differential form of First Law, First Law and various Processes. 
Thermodynamic properties of pure substance [4 Lectures]: Phase change process of pure substance and their 
property diagram, Use of steam table and Mollier diagram. 
Energy analysis of closed and open systems [8 Lectures]: First law analysis for closed systems, Steady flow 
energy equation, Flow processes, Throttling process, Joule-Thomson effect, Energy analysis of open systems, 
and Analysis of First law for unsteady flow. 
Second law of thermodynamics [4 Lectures]: Reversible and Irreversible processes, Kelvin-Planck and 
Clausius statement, Heat engines, Heat pumps, Carnot cycle. 
Entropy [9 Lectures]: Definitions of entropy, statistical definition of pressure, temperature, entropy, Change 
of entropy for various processes, machine learning and coding application examples, Equilibrium, 
Spontaneity relations for Entropy, Helmholtz free energy, Gibbs free energy. 
Thermodynamic property relations [3 Lectures]: Maxwell relations, Clausius-Clapeyron equation 
Exergy [3 Lectures]: Definition of exergy, second law efficiency, Irreversibility, Exergy balance. 
 
Text Books 
1. Moran, M. J. & Shapiro, H. N., (2011), Fundamentals of Engineering Thermodynamics, 7th Edition, Wiley. 
2. Cengel, Y. A. & Boles, M. A., (2010), Thermodynamics: An Engineering Approach, McGraw Hill 

Education 
3. Sonntag, R. E. & Wylen, V., (1998), Fundamentals of Thermodynamics, Wiley 
4. Zemansky M., (2017), Heat and Thermodynamics, McGrawhill 

 
Online course Material 
Prof. Keith A. Nelson & Prof. Moungi Bawendi., Thermodynamics and Chemical Kinetics, MIT 
OpenCourseWare, Link: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/chemistry/5-60-thermodynamics-kinetics-spring-
2008/ 

 
 
 
 

27 
 



Title Introduction to Analytical Number PHL2XXX 
Mechanics 

Department Physics L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech of all branches Type Program Linked Science 

(LS) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide concepts and problem solving approach related to Newtonian and Lagrangian formulation in 
Mechanics. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Solve problems in Newtonian,  Lagrangian and Hamilton formalism 
 
Content 
Introduction to Newtonian  and Lagrangian mechanics, constraints, D'Alembert's principle, Problems solving 
approach in Newtonian  and Lagrangian formalism (12 Lectures) 
Central force problem: The equation of motion, the equivalent one-dimensional problem, classification of 
orbits, Virial theorem, Differential equation for the orbit, inverse square law of force, scattering in the central 
force field. (10 Lectures) 
Variational Principles and Lagrange’s equations: calculus of variations, Hamilton's principle, derivation of 
Lagrange's equation from Hamilton's principle, its application, conservation and symmetry property. (8 
Lectures) 
Rigid body motion: orthogonal transformation, the Eulerian angles, Euler’s theorem, infinitesimal rotation,  
Rodrigues formula,  quaternion, the heavy symmetrical top, Gyroscope, Foucault Pendulum ( 8 Lectures) 
Hamilton's equation of motion: Legendre transformations and Hamilton's equation (4 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Simon, Keith. R., Mechanics Second Edition Addison -Wesley publication (1960).  
2. Analytical Mechanics, L. N. Hand and J. D. Finch Paperback (1998) 
 
Reference Books 
1. Goldstein, H., Classical Mechanics, Pearson India Limited, New Delhi (2011). 
2. Landau, L.D. and Lifshitz, E.M., Mechanics, Pergamon Press, (1960) 
 
Online course Material 
Prof. Harbola. M. K. , Engineering Mechanics,  Indian Institute of Technology -Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/115/104/115104094/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

28 
 



Title Fluid Mechanics Number MEL2XX0/ CHL2XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering/  Chemical L-T-P [C] 3–1–0[4] 

Engineering 
Offered for B.Tech (ME, CH) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. To inculcate the fundamental laws governing fluid flow 
2. Help the students to understand the importance and application of fluid mechanics. 
3. To exemplify concepts of similarity and model testing 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply fundamental knowledge in modelling and analysis of fluid flow problems in engineering 
2. Interpret data from experiments of fluid flows and solve using differential equations and charts 
 
Contents 
Introduction [2 Lecture]: Definition and properties, continuum approach, types of fluids, basics of vector 
calculus and index notations. 
Fluid statics [4 Lectures]: Basic equations, Manometry,hydrostatic force on submerged bodies, rigid body 
motion.  
Integral analysis of fluid flow [4 Lectures]:  Reynolds transport theorem, conservation equations.  
Differential analysis [5 Lectures]: Kinematics of fluids -Deformations in fluid particle, strain rate, vorticity, 
stream function, potential function, streamlines, pathlines, streaklines, derivation of Navier-Stokes equations. 
Incompressible Inviscid flow [6 Lectures]: Euler’s equation, Bernoulli’s equation, elementary potential flows, 
superposition of elementary flows. Vorticity and vortex flows 
Internal Incompressible Viscous flow [4 Lectures]:Hagen-Poiseuille and Couette flows,skin friction and loss 
coefficients, venturimeter, orifice meter and Pitot tube. 
External Incompressible Viscous flow [5 Lecture]: Boundary layer over flat plate, boundary layer thickness, 
Prandtl-boundary layer equations, momentum integral equation, adverse pressure gradient & separation, 
drag coefficients.  
Dimensional analysis and similarity [2 Lectures]: Buckingham Pi theorem and examples. 
Introduction to Turbulent flows [3 Lectures]: Decomposition of instantaneous velocities, time-averaged 
continuity and Navier-Stokes equations, Reynolds stresses, turbulent viscosity.  
Basics of Compressible flow [3 Lectures]: Acoustic waves, isentropic equations, concept of shock waves  
Few Industrial Applications [4 Lectures]: Pipe networks, Flow past immersed objects, Agitation and Mixing.  
 
Text Book 
1. Fox, R. W., Pitchard, P. J and McDonald, A. T., (2010), Introduction to Fluid Mechanics, 7thEdition, John 

Wiley & Sons Inc. 
2. Munson, B. R., Rothmayer, A. P., Okiishi, T’H., and Huebsch, W. W. Fundamentals of Fluid Mechanics, 

7th Edition, John Wiley and Sons 
3. Kundu, P. K, Cohen, I. M and Dowling, D. R, Fluid Mechanics, 6th Edn., Associated Press. 
4. McCabe, W.L., Smith, J.C., Harriott, P., (2005), Unit Operations of Chemical Engineering, 7th edition, 

McGraw-Hill International edition. 
  
Reference Books 
1. White, F. M.,(2003), Fluid Mechanics, 5thEdition,  McGraw-Hil 
2. Cimbala, J.M. and Cengel, Y.A., (2010),Fluid Mechanics: Fundamentals and Applications, McGraw-Hill  
3. Bird. R. B., Stewart, W. E. and Lightfoot, E. N., 2006, Transport Phenomena, 2nd edition, John Wiley & 

Sons. 
4. Panton, Ronald L - Incompressible flow, John Wiley & Sons, 2006. Third edition is available from Wiley 

Student Edition 
 
Self-Learning Material  
S. Chakrabarty, Introduction to Fluid Mechanics,  NPTEL Course Material, Mechanical Engineering, IIT 
Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/105/112105269/ 

29 
 



V.Shankar, Fluid Mechanics,  NPTEL Course Material, Chemical Engineering, IIT Kanpur,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/104/103104044/# 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 



Title Fluid Mechanics Lab Number MEP3XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2[1] 
Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 
Prerequisite Fluid Mechanics   
Objectives 
The instructor will 
1. To introduce various forms of flow measuring devices and techniques 
2. To provide hands on experience on in the area of experimental fluid mechanics 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have: 
1. Ability to design experimental methods for fluid flow problems 
2. Ability to interpret data from experiments of fluid flows and usage of charts and hand books 
 
Contents 
Determination of head loss in pipes having different diameters, different materials and different roughness  
Determination of pressure drop at different types of bends and valves  
Reynolds apparatus to measure critical Reynolds number for pipe flows  
Measurement of Cp distribution on a cylinder 
Make survey experiments in a flow over a cylinder 
Impacts of jets on flat and curved plates  
Wind tunnel calibration using Pitot static tube 
Working principle of different flow meters (orifice plate, venture meter, turbine, Rota meter, electromagnetic 
flow meter) 
Effect of change in cross section and application of the Bernoulli equation 
Flow measurement around an object or blockage using PIV technique  
Class projects for designing and measurement of simple fluid mechanics experiments  
 
Reference Books 
1. Fox,  R.  W.,  Pitchard,P.  J.,and McDonald,  A.  T., (2010), Introduction to Fluid Mechanics, 7thEdition, John 

Wiley & Sons Inc. 
2. Cimbala, J.M.,  Cengel, Y. A. (2010),Fluid Mechanics: Fundamentals and Applications, McGraw-Hill  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

31 
 



Title Mechanics of Solids Number ME2XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–1–0 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech  Type Programme Compulsory 

(PC) 
Prerequisite    

Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. To inculcate fundamental concepts of stress, strain and deformation of solids 
2. Fundamental of applying equilibrium, compatibility and forced deformation relationships to structural 

elements 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Apply the fundamentals to analyze structural members 
2. Physical insight into distribution of stresses and strains in structural members 
3. Ability to design structural members using dimensions, force-displacement relationships, boundary 

conditions, loading and allowable stress 
 
Contents 
Stress and strain [10 Lectures]: Concept of stress at a point, Plane stress case: transformation of stresses at a 
point, principal stresses and Mohr's circle, Displacement field, Concept of strain at a point, Plane strain case: 
transformation of strain at a point, principal strains and Mohr's circle, Strain Rosette, Polar coordinates in 
stress and strain analysis. St. Venant’s principles and stress concentrations  
Mechanical behaviour [8 Lectures]: Concepts of elasticity, plasticity, strain hardening, failure 
(fracture/yielding), Generalized Hooke's law (without and with thermal strains) for isotropic materials, 
orthotropic and anisotropic materials, Force displacement relationship and geometric compatibility for 
axially loaded members and thin walled pressure vessels 
Static Analysis[5 Lectures]: Complete equations of elasticity; Force analysis (axial force, shear force, bending 
moment, and twisting moment diagrams) of slender members 
Elastic Bending[5 Lectures]: Moment curvature relationship for pure bending of beams with symmetric cross 
section, bending stress, shear stress; Cases of combined stresses, Deflection due to bending, Integration of the 
moment curvature relationship for simple boundary conditions, Stress concentrations   
Elastic torsion[5 Lectures]: Torsion of circular shafts and thin walled tubes, Stress concentrations  
Strain Energy[5 Lectures]: Concept of strain energy, strain energy for simple structural elements, Castigliano's 
theorems for deflection analysis and indeterminate problems;  
Elastic Buckling [4 Lectures]: Concept of elastic instability, Introduction to column buckling, Euler's formula  
 
Text Books 
1. Crandall, S.H., Dahl, N.C., and Lardner, T. J., (1978), An Introduction to the Mechanics of Solids, McGraw 

Hill, Second Ed. with SI Units. 
2. Beer, F.P, Johnston, E.R. and De Wolf, J.T., (2004), Mechanics of Materials, Tata McGrawHill.  
3. Popov, E.P., (1990),Engineering Mechanics of Solids, First Ed. Prentice Hall 
4. Meriam, J.L. and Kraige, L.G., (1980), Engineering Mechanics, Vol. 1: Statics, 2nd Ed. John Wiley 
5. Timoshenko, S.P. and Goodier, J.N. ``Theory of Elasticity``, McGraw-Hill, International Edition, 1970. 
 
Self Learning Materials 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/106/105106116/ 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/102/105102090/ 
3. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/104/105104160/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
 



Title Geoinformatics Number CI2XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech  Type Program Core (PC) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. To introduce the basic principles of photogrammetry, remote sensing, GPS and GIS. 
2. To teach application of geo-informatics in geoscience, ecology and environment study, agriculture, and 

disaster management. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
A graduate of this course will have a thorough idea of: 
1. Stereoscopic vision and principles. 
2. Multispectral, thermal infrared, and microwave remote sensing. 
3. Different map projections and use of GPS. 
4. Component GIS and applications. 
5. Different cartographic models, implementation, validation, and visualization.. 
 
Content 
Module I: Photogrammetry (Lectures: 10) 
Aerial Photographs and Photography: Types of photographs; Geometry; Image displacement; Comparison 
of aerial photographs and map; Planning of photographic flights; Execution of flights; Aerial cameras. Use of 
Drones 
Stereoscopic Vision: Binocular observations; Separation of stereoscopic pair; Types of stereoscope; 
Measurement of height from photographs; Stereo model; Model deformation. 
Radio Line Methods and Map Compilations: Graphical Radial Triangulation; Mechanical Radial 
Triangulation; Map compilations by graphical methods. Radial line plotter. Accuracy of radial lime methods.   
Aerial Mosaics: Planning for Mosaics; Mosaic compilation; Annotation and reproduction; Choice of methods. 
 
Module II: Remote Sensing (Lectures: 12) 
Basic Concepts: Interaction of EMR with atmosphere; Interaction of EMR with Earth’s surface; Sensors; 
Platforms. 
Remote Sensing in Thermal Infrared Region: Emissivity; Thermal Infrared Sensors; Characteristics of thermal 
images; Applications. 
Remote Sensing in Microwave Region and Lidar: Passive systems; Active systems; SAR image characteristics; 
SAR image interpretation; Lidar. 
Multispectral and Hyperspectral Remote Sensing: Basics of multispectral and hyperspectral imaging 
Satellite Remote Sensing: Landsat; IRS and other satellites; Visual interpretation; Applications of satellite 
imagery. 
 
Module III: Global Positioning System (Lectures: 10) 
Map: Map numbering; Rectangular grid system; Classification of map projections; Some useful projections; 
Georeferencing. 
Global Positioning System: Components of GPS; Operational principle; Facts and limitations of GPS; GPS 
receivers; Differential GPS concepts; Types of differential GPS; Areas of application 
 
Module IV: Geographical Information System (Lectures: 10) 
Geographical Information System: GIS concepts; components; Spatial Data Representation; Relationships of 
spatial objects; GIS functions; Remote sensing and GIS; GIS applications and status in India. 
Cartographic Modelling: Cartographic models; Inductive and deductive modelling; Model flowcharting; 
Conflict resolution; Verification and implementation. 
Cartography and Visualization: Cartographic output; Thematic maps and cartograms; Multivariate Display; 
Web mapping and visualization; Virtual and immersion environments; Mapping the temporal dimension. 
Applications:Environment; Agriculture; Public Health; Water Resources Engineering; Transportation 
Engineering; Disaster Management.  
 
Text Books 

33 
 



1. G. S. Srivastava (2014) An Introduction to Geoinformatics. McGraw Hill Education (India) Private 
Limited. New Delhi. India. ISBN: 9781259058462. 

2. Michael N. DeMers (2008) Fundamentals of Geographic Information Systems (4th Ed). Wiley. ISBN: 978-
0-470-12906-7. 

3. T. M. Lillesand, R. W. Kiefer, J. W. Chipman (2004) Remote Sensing and Image Interpretation (5th Ed). 
Wiley. ISBN: 0-471-15227-7 

 
Other Books 
1. L. E. Johnson (2009) Geographic Information Systems in Water Resources Engineering. CRC Press. Taylor 

& Francis Group. ISBN 978‑1‑4200‑6913‑6. 
2. B. Tomaszewski (2015) Geographic Information Systems (GIS) for Disaster Management. CRC Press. 

Taylor & Francis Group. ISBN-13: 978-1-4822-1169-6. 
3. Myer Kutz (Ed.) (2004) Gary S. Spring. Applications of GIS In Transportation. In book: Handbook of 

Transportation. McGraw-Hill Handbooks. 
 
Online course Material 
1. Prof. Arun K. Saraf (2016) Introduction to Geographic Information System. NPTEL. 

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/107/105107155/ 
2. Prof. Arun K. Saraf (2017) Introduction to Remote Sensing. NPTEL. 

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/121/107/121107009/ 
3. Prof. Rishikesh Bharti (2019) Remote Sensing and GIS. NPTEL. 

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/103/105103193/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 



Title Geotechnical Engineering Number CI2XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech [CIE] Type Program 

Compulsory (PC) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Introducing basic principles of soil mechanics and foundation design. 
2. Introducing the testing techniques to determine the engineering properties of soil. 
3. Introducing design principles of foundations for structures.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to 
1. Interpret various engineering properties of soil and choose appropriate strength properties for design. 
2. Evaluate the stresses on soils and foundations and provide subsequent design solutions 
3. Design shallow and deep foundations for traditional structures 
4. Assess the stability of retaining walls under different loading conditions. 
5. Apply the soil exploration techniques to prepare subsoil profiles 
 
Contents 
Module 1[Lectures: 10] 
Introduction, origin of soils, index properties, soil structure and clay mineralogy,basic geotechnical 
definitions and relationships, laboratory tests, soil classifications,effective stress, capillarity and permeability: 
Principle of effective stress; Darcy's Law; permeability; coefficient of permeability; permeability of layered 
systems 
 
Module 2 [Lectures: 6] 
Seepage through soils, vertical stresses, flow nets, quick sand condition; stresses induced by applied loads, 
Boussinesq’s and Westergaard’s theories for point loads and areas of different shapes, Newmark’s influence 
chart, compaction, laboratory tests 
 
Module 3 [Lectures: 10] 
Consolidation, stress history of soil, spring Analogy –Terzaghi’s one dimensional consolidation theory, 
determination of coefficient of consolidation, shear strength of soils, Mohr – Coulomb failure theories, shear 
strength determination, critical Void Ratio, liquefaction introduction 
 
Module 4[Lectures: 6] 
Slope stability, infinite slopes and translational slides, finite slopes, forms of slip surface, total stress and 
Effective stress methods of analysis, earth pressure and retaining structures, earth pressure theories 
 
Module 5[Lectures: 10] 
Shallow foundations, bearing capacity, factors influencing bearing capacity,analytical methods to determine 
bearing capacity, Terzaghi’s theory –IS Methods,plate load test, types of foundation settlements, deep 
foundations, load carrying capacity of piles, pile load tests, settlement of pile groups, well 
foundations,components of well; forces acting on well foundations; construction and sinking of wells; tilt and 
shift 
 
Text Books 
1. Bowles J.E. (1997). Foundation Analysis and Design (5th Ed). Tata McGraw-Hill International Edition. 

ISBN 0-07-912247-7. 
2. Budhu. M (2012). Soil Mechanics and Foundations (3rd Ed). John Wiley and Sons. ISBN: 978-0-470-55684-

9. 
3. Robert W. day (2010). Foundation Engineering Handbook (2nd Ed). McGraw-Hill Professional. ISBN 978-

0-07-174010-4 
Additional references 
Foundation Engineering (2018) by Prof. Kousik Deb on NPTEL. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105176/ 

 

35 
 



Title Geotechnical Engineering Number CI2XX0 
Laboratory 

Department Civil and Infrastructure L-T-P [C] 0-0-3 [1.5] 
Engineering 

Offered for B.Tech [CIE] Type Program Compulsory (PC) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Familiarizing students with the physical and engineering properties of soil. 
2. Introducing the laboratory testing equipment and their functioning principles 
3. Introducing basic field soil testing techniques 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to: 
1. Classify the soils roughly based on visual identification 
2. Determine the index and engineering properties of soils 
3. Use simple and complex field and laboratory testing techniques to determine the shear strength of soils 
 
Contents 
Experiments 
Visual classification of soils  
Specific gravity and moisture content determination  
Dry and wet sieve analysis of soils  
Sedimentation analysis: Hydrometer analysis  
Atterberg limits: liquid limit; plastic limit and shrinkage limit  
Permeability of soils through constant head and falling head tests 
Field unit weight through sand replacement and core cutter tests 
Laboratory compaction: light weight and heavy weight  
Consolidation of soil  
Direct shear test for sands  
Unconfined compression test on cohesive specimens 
Triaxial compression test: Unconsolidated undrained; consolidated undrained  
Vane shear test  
Standard penetration test and other miscellaneous field tests 
 
Text Books 
1. Das B.M. (2009). Soil mechanics laboratory manual (7th Ed). OUP USA International Edition. ISBN 10-

0195367596. 
2. Fratta D. Aguettant J. Smith L.R. (2007). Introduction to Soil Mechanics Laboratory Testing. CRC Press-

Taylor & Francis Group (1st Ed). ISBN-10: 1138430242 
3. Budhu. M (2012). Soil Mechanics and Foundations (3rd Ed). John Wiley and Sons. ISBN: 978-0-470-55684-

9. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
 



Title Environmental Engineering Number CI2XX0 
Department Civil and In Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for B. Tech [CIE] Type Program Compulsory 

(PC) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. To gain understanding of the basic concept of air pollution, its sources, and pollutant transport and 

dispersion. 
2. To develop understanding of the concepts and strategies for control of particulate matter and gas-phase 

pollutants.  
3. To develop understanding of water quality, water supply systems and wastewater treatment systems. 
4. To develop a basic understanding of the life cycle of waste generation to disposal.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. The students are expected to achieve proficiency in: 
2. Developing a broad overview of various unit operations involved in water treatment and design. 
3. Understanding and solving problems related to pollutant dispersion as well as identifying the right 

control techniques/measures to meet the desired standard levels.  
4. Develop understanding of collection, transfer, treatment, management and disposal of solid waste. 
 
Contents 
Module I: Wastewater Treatment [Lectures 14]. 
Sources, nature and characteristics, generation and collection of wastewater, sanitary, storm and combined 
sewage systems design and flows; primary treatment methods (screening, grit removal, sedimentation and 
coagulation); secondary treatment methods (attached and suspended growth systems, biomass growth and 
yield, BOD kinetics); Aerobic and anaerobic processes,; Nitrification-denitrification systems; Sludge 
characteristics, thickening and disposal  
 
Module II: Air pollution [Lectures 14] 
 Sources, types and classification of air pollutants, air pollution episodes, effect of air pollutants on human 
health, vegetation and materials, air quality and emission standards, air pollution legislation, effect of 
meteorology: Lapse rate, Atmospheric Stability, Plume behavior and dispersion, Stack height; Methods for 
pollutant monitoring and control, design and selection of control equipments, engineering emission control 
concepts, pollutant removal and disposal, source control technologies, Indoor air pollution sources and 
control. 
 
Module III: Solid Waste Management [Lectures 14] 
Fundamentals of Solid Waste Management, Management of solid waste, Hazardous Waste Management: 
Fundamentals, Radioactive Waste Management: Fundamentals, Environmental Risk Assessment, 
Physicochemical Treatment of Solid and Hazardous Waste, Biological Treatment of Solid and Hazardous 
Waste, Incineration, Landfill Design. E-Waste Management. 
 
Laboratory  
Introduction to laboratory and preliminary examination of water (color, odor and taste) 
Determination of pH, alkalinity, turbidity and optimum coagulant dose, and conductivity 
Determination of solids (total, dissolved, organic, inorganic and settleable) and hardness 
Determination of chloride, sulphates and sulfide in water 
Determination of iron and manganese in water 
Determination of DO and BOD in wastewater 
Determination of phosphorus and fluoride in water 
Determination of free and combined residual chlorine in water  
Determination of coliforms in water 
Demonstration of Analytical Instruments: water–related 
Demonstration of Air Sampling Devices and Weather Monitoring Station 
 
Text Books 

37 
 



1. Stull, R. “Practical Meteorology: An algebra-based survey of atmospheric science” – version 1.02b. Univ. 
of British Columbia. 2017. 

2. Aerosol Measurement: Principles, Techniques and Applications, edited by K. Willeke, P. Baron, Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, 1993. 

3. Burton F.L., Tchobanoglous G., Stensel H.D., 2017, WasteWater Engineering Treatment and Reuse, 
4thed.,Tata McGraw-Hill. 

4. Arceivala S.J. and Asolekar S.R., 2007, Wastewater Treatment for Pollution Control and Reuse, 3rd Ed., 
Tata McGraw Hill. 

5. George Tchobanoglous, Hilary Theisen, Samuel Vigil, Integrated Solid Waste Management: Engineering 
Principles and Management Issues, McGraw-Hill Series in Water Resources and Environmental 
Engineering, ISBN-10: 0070632375, ISBN-13: 978-0070632370 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
 



Title Smart Infrastructure Engineering Number CI2XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech [CIE] Type Program Compulsory (PC) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Understanding the integration of digital technology in infrastructure systems 
2. Designing a smart infrastructure system at various scales 
 
Learning Outcomes  
At the end of the course, students will be able to: 
1. Realize and integrate various elements of smart infrastructure systems 
2. Instrument, monitor and analyze a physical entity for effective decision making 
3. Design, develop and manage smart infrastructure systems 
 
Contents 
Module 1: Introduction to Infrastructure [Lectures: 6] 
Examples of infrastructure systems: Water supply and distribution, Transport systems, Energy management, 
Building infrastructure, Waste Management. Need for making these infrastructures smart. 
 
Module 2: Data Acquisition [Lectures: 8] 
Sensors for different applications – Basic Principles and interpretation of their outputs; Sensors – Inertial 
Sensors, Fibre Optic Sensing, Optical Sensors including 2D and 3D Camera. Use of satellite images and 
Drones for sensing. IOT, Networking, Fog and Cloud for data acquisition. Sensor placement. Case studies for 
selected infrastructures. 
 
Module 3: Analysis of Data [Lectures: 12] 
Review of data processing for interpretation and decision-making using machine learning and AI; machine 
learning and AI applications in transportation problems (e.g. planning public transport, road traffic 
prediction, traffic incident detection) and environmental (e.g. air pollution management), Application of 
machine learning in water distribution networks (monitoring, alarm generation, urban water resource 
management). AI for Building Management; Use of ML for structural health management. 
 
Module 4: Control Applications in Infrastructure [Lectures: 10] 
Introduction to basics of control systems including feedback control; feedback control in the field of structural 
dynamics (tool to protect bridges, buildings against wind, earthquake, etc.), life-cycle management of 
infrastructure; introduction to pollution control systems. 
 
Module 5: Design for adaptability [Lectures: 6] 
Design of smart infrastructure with adaptive capabilities; Design of smart city considering infrastructures of 
energy, mobility, health and sustainability and their growing interdependencies. 
 
Text Books 
1. Raj, P., & Raman, A. C. (2015). Intelligent Cities: Enabling Tools and Technology. CRC Press. 
2. Meneguette, R. I., De Grande, R. E., & Loureiro, A. A. (2018). Intelligent transport system in smart cities. 

Springer: Cham, Switzerland. 
3. Deakin, Mark; Al Waer, Husam (Eds.) (2012), From Intelligent to Smart Cities, Routledge, Taylor & 

Francis, USA and Canada 
4. Song, H., Srinivasan, R., Sookoor, T., & Jeschke, S. (2017). Smart cities: foundations, principles, and 

applications. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9781119226390 
 
Additional References 
Berglund, E. Z., Monroe, J. G., Ahmed, I., Noghabaei, M., Do, J., Pesantez, J. E., ... & Levis, J. (2020). Smart 
Infrastructure: A Vision for the Role of the Civil Engineering Profession in Smart Cities. Journal of 
Infrastructure Systems, 26(2), 03120001. 
1. Haarstad, H. (2017). Constructing the sustainable city: Examining the role of sustainability in the ‘smart 

city’ discourse. Journal of Environmental Policy & Planning, 19(4), 423-437. 

39 
 



2. ASCE. (2017) Infrastructure Report Card: A comprehensive assessment of America’s infrastructure. 
Reston, VA: ASCE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 



Title Construction Technology and Practices Number CI2XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for B. Tech [CIE] Type Program 

Compulsory (PC) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To motivate students to learn and appreciate various components of a building, their functions, materials 

of constructions, and different stages of construction. 
2. To impact the basics of calculation of quantities and rates of construction works 
3. To introduce planning and scheduling of construction projects 
 
Learning Outcomes 
At the end of the course, the student should be able to: 
1. Assimilate properties of building materials 
2. Understand components of building construction such as foundation, floor, wall and roof. 
3. Assimilate quantity and quality of materials for building construction and prepare building estimate 
4. Create project schedule, bar charts, and critical path networks 
 
Contents 
Module I: Construction materials [Lectures-10]: 
Properties and uses of common types of stones, bricks, tiles and hollow building blocks, Pozzolanic Material, 
Cement, lime and mortar, Properties, types and applications of other building materials like timber, 
protective coverings [Paints and varnishes], rubber, bitumen, tar and asphalt, glass, plastics and polymers, 
refractory materials etc, Introduction to concrete mix design 
 
Module II: Building construction[Lectures – 10]: 
Building construction: Components of building, shallow and deep foundations; Stone and brick masonry, 
type of bonds, load bearing walls, cavity wall, partition walls, finishing/coating materials for 
roofs/floors/walls, construction and expansion joints; Introduction to Green building and LEED 
classifications. 
 
Module III: Building Estimates [Lectures – 10]: 
Types and methods, Detailed specifications for common building materials, Preparation of detailed estimates 
for RCC single storey building, Calculation of quantities of materials and analysis of rates.  
 
Module IV: Introduction to Project Planning and Network Analysis [Lectures -12] 
Introduction to Scheduling, Controlling, Methods of Planning and Programming, Network - Graphical 
Presentation and guidelines 
 
Construction materials laboratory 
Cement: 
Consistency and setting time   
Soundness test  
Blaine’s air permeability test 
Specific gravity  
Compressive strength of hydraulic cement 
 
Aggregate: 
Specific gravity and water absorption of coarse aggregate 
Bulk density  
Specific gravity and water absorption of fine aggregate 
Particle size distribution 
Aggregate crushing strength test.   
Los Angeles Abrasion test.  
Aggregate impact test.  
Flakiness index and Elongation index test. 
 

41 
 



Concrete: 
Concrete slump test 
7 day compressive/split tensile/flexural strength 
Air content of concrete by pressure method 
Determination of unit weight of concrete 
 
Bitumen: 
Penetration test 
Ductility test 
Viscosity test 
Softening point test 
Flash and fire point test 
 
Miscellaneous test for pavements 
Determination of bitumen content by centrifuge extractor 
Determination of Marshall stability value 
Determination of rebound deflection of pavement by Benkelman beam 
 
Text Books 
1. Gambhir, M. L. and Neha Jamwal, Building Materials, Tata McGraw Hill.  
2. Huntington, W. C. Building Construction, John Wiley, New York 
3. Dutta, B. N. Estimating and Costing in Civil Engineering, Theory and Practice. UBS Publishers' 

Distributors Pvt Ltd. 
4. Srinath, L. S. An Introduction to Project Management, Tata McGraw Hill 
 
Additional References 
1. Rangwala, S. C. Engineering Materials, Charotar Publishing House, Anand 
2. Punmia, B., C. Building Construction, Laxmi Publications, New Delhi 
3. Shah, N. A. Quantity Surveying and Valuation. Khanna Publishers. 
4. Mazda, F. Engineering Management, Adison Wesley, Longman Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 



Title Transportation Engineering Number CI2XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech [CIE] Type Program Compulsory (PC) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The course will introduce students to the planning, alignment, construction, and operation of highways and 
traffic flow analysis. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. At the end of the course, the student should be able to: 
2. Carry out surveys involved in planning and highway alignment 
3. Design cross section elements, sight distance, horizontal and vertical alignment 
4. Determine the characteristics of pavement materials 
5. Implement traffic studies, traffic regulations and controls, and intersection design 
 
Contents 
Module I: Introduction to Transportation Engineering [Lectures-3]: 
Transportation system; Introduction to Highway Engineering; Road classification, Terrain classification, 
Factors affecting transportation 
 
Module II: Transportation Planning [Lectures – 10] 
Urban Transportation Planning- Comprehensive planning, System Engineering process; Zoning for 
Transportation surveys/data collection; Four-step transportation planning-Trip generation, Trip 
distribution, Modal split, Route assignment. 
 
Module III: Geometric design [Lectures – 10]: 
Highway classification; Factors affecting geometric design; Highway design process-Highway cross sectional 
elements, Sight distance, Highway alignment: Horizontal alignment -horizontal curve, Super elevation, extra 
widening, Transition curve, Setback distance, Visibility, Vertical alignment -gradient, grade compensation, 
summit curve, valley curve.  
 
Module IV: Pavement Engineering [Lectures -10] 
Pavement characteristics, materials, Types of pavement- Flexible and Rigid pavements, Wheel load 
calculations, Flexible Pavement materials- soil, aggregate, bitumen; Tests on pavement materials; Bituminous 
mix design, Marshall stability; Rigid pavement- joints, analysis of stresses; IRC method for design of flexible 
and rigid pavement; Pavement failures. 
 
Module V: Traffic Engineering [Lectures -9] 
Transportation system, Factors affecting traffic performance, Micro and macro elements of traffic flow, 
fundamental diagram of traffic flow, Introduction to traffic signs and signals 
 
Text Books 
1. N. J. Garber, L.A. Hoel. Traffic and Highway Engineering, 4th Edition 
2. Saxena S. C.  Textbook of Highway and Traffic Engineering, CBS Publishers. 
3. Wright Dixon, Highway Engineering, Wiley India. 
 
Additional References 
1. S. K. Khanna, C. E. G. Justo, and A. Veeraragavan. Highway Engineering, Nem Chand and Bros. 

Publishers. 
2. I.S. specifications on concrete, aggregates and bituminous materials. 
3. David Croney, Design and performance of road pavements, McGraw Hill 
4. Dr. L. R. Kadiyali, Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning, Khanna Publishers. 
5. James H. Banks, Introduction to Transportation Engineering, McGraw Hill 
6. R. Srinivasa Kumar, Textbook of Highway Engineering, University Press 
7. IRC: SP:21-2009. Guidelines on landscaping and tree plantation. 
8. R. P. Roess, E.S. Prassas, W.R. McShane. Traffic Engineering, 4th edition, Pearson. 

43 
 



9. Chakroborty, P., Animesh Das. Principles of Transportation Engineering. Second Edition, PHI Learning 
Private Limited 

10. Samuel Morgan. Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning. Williford Pr. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

44 
 



Title Water Resources Engineering Number CI2XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for B. Tech [CIE] Type Program Compulsory 

(PC) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
In this course the students will:  
1. Learn to describe the fundamental concepts of hydrology 
2. Understand various methods of hydrologic analysis 
3. Apply various hydrologic and hydraulic analysis methods to design stormwater drains, dams, irrigation 

and diversion structures 
 
Learning Outcomes 
At the end of the course, the student should be able to: 
1. Conceptualize different hydrologic process based on physical laws 
2. Apply the concept of flood and reservoir routing in real data and solve the field issues 
3. Find solutions for water resources issues such as urban flooding, water management and groundwater 

depletion. 
 
Contents 
MODULE I: [No. of lectures – 11] 
Introduction: Hydraulic cycle, Precipitation: forms, classification, variability, measurement, data analysis. 
Evapotranspiration: Penman-Monteith and other methods, Infiltration: factors affecting, estimation by NRCS, 
Green-Ampt methods 
 
MODULE II: [No. of lectures-10] 
Runoff: Drainage basin characteristics, hydrographs, concepts, assumptions and limitations of unit 
hydrograph, derivation of unit hydrograph, flow duration curve, rainfall-runoff modelling Hydraulic 
analysis and design: Design flood estimation, frequency analysis, flood routing, storm drainage design; Flood 
management: Flood mitigation, flood damage analysis 
 
MODULE III: [No. of lectures-10]  
Dams: types, forces, failure types and causes; design of gravity dams. Reservoirs: safe yield, capacity design, 
reliability, design of overflow spillway; Hydroelectric power: Low, medium and high head plants, 
powerhouse components, microhydel 
 
MODULE IV: [No. of lectures-11] 
Role of economics in water resources planning: Multipurpose projects, issues in water resources planning 
and development, system techniques, risk analysis Irrigation: Irrigation water requirement computation, 
diversion structures, cross drainage structures, regulation structures, filed irrigation methods Groundwater: 
Occurrence, hydraulics of wells, yield, artificial recharge 
 
Irrigation Engineering Design Laboratory:  
Design of Irrigation Canal [lined and unlined]  
Design of canal outlets  
Design of Alluvial channels carrying clear and sediment laden water  
Design the section of hydraulic jump 
Design of cross drainage structures with typical plan and section  
Design of profile of ogee spillway  
Design of Trapezoidal Notch Fall, SARDA fall and Glacis Fall 
Design of Cisterns  
Analysis and Design of gravity dam  
Analysis and Design of earth embankment dam  
Problems related to energy dissipators  
 
Text Books 
1. Mays, L.W. Water Resources Engineering, John Wiley and sons, Inc., Kundli 

45 
 



2. Todd, D. K. and Mays, L. W. Ground Water Hydrology, John Wiley India Edition 
 
Additional References 
1. Chow, V.T., Maidment, D.R., and Mays L.W. Applied Hydrology. McGraw-Hill Inc., New York. 
2. James, L.D., and Lee, R.R. Economics of water resources planning. McGraw-Hill Book Inc., New York. 
3. Garg, S.K. Irrigation Engineering and Hydraulic Structures. Khanna Publishers, Delhi. 
4. Linsley, R.K., Franzini, J.B., Freyberg, D.L., and Tchobanoglous, G. Water Resources Engineering, McGraw 

Hill Inc., Singapore. 
5. Singh, V.P. Elementary Hydrology. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

46 
 



Title Structural Analysis Number CI2XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech. [CIE] Type PC 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
This course aims at: 
1. Introduction to fundamental concepts of structural analysis. 
2. Development of analytical skills to compute quantities like displacements, stresses etc. in structures 

subjected to static forces. 
3. Analytical and numerical methods as well as procedures in a way that emphasize physical insight. 
4. Problem solving ability for static loads in Civil Engineering design of structures. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to: 
1. Establish equilibrium equations of structural systems. 
2. Analyze the responses and stresses generated in structures subjected to different types of static loading. 
3. Apply the structural analysis methods to solve real-world problems of the building, bridges etc. 
 
Contents 
Module 1 
Analysis of statically determinate structures: Determination of internal force on a system; internal forces 
acting on typical structural members - axial force, shear force and bending moment; discussion on sign 
convention and notations for internal forces; obtaining internal forces in a system - general procedure; 
internal force diagrams for various systems; analysis of pin jointed determinate truss. (Lectures: 8) 
Module 2 
Determination of slope and deflection of beams: Solving differential equation of the elastic curve, slope and 
deflection of beams by method of successive integration; Macaulay’s method; moment area method; 
conjugate beam method; principle of virtual work; strain energy method; bending deflection due to 
temperature variation; Maxwell-Betti law of reciprocal deflections. (Lectures: 9) 
Module 3 
Force method: Introduction and applications of analysis of statically indeterminate beams - the force method; 
analysis of statically indeterminate structures by energy method; three moment equation for shear force, 
bending moment diagrams, deflection and support settlement. (Lectures: 10) 
Module 4 
Moving loads and influence lines: Introduction to variable loading, construction of influence lines using 
equilibrium method, use of influence lines for reaction, shear force and bending moment in simply supported 
beams; influence lines for forces in trusses; analysis for different types of moving loads - concentrated loads, 
uniformly distributed load etc. (Lectures: 7) 
Module 5 
Cables, suspension bridges and arches: Analysis of forces in cables, suspension bridges with three-hinged 
and two-hinged stiffening girders; theory of arches; Eddy’s theorem; analysis of three-hinged and two-hinged 
arches; settlement and temperature effects. (Lectures: 8) 
 
Text Books 
1. C. K Wang (2010) Intermediate Structural Analysis (1st Ed), Tata McGraw Hill. ISBN 9780070702493. 
2. S. Timoshenko, D.H. Young, J.V. Rao, S. Patil (2013) Engineering Mechanics (In SI Units) (5th Ed), Tata 

McGraw-Hill Education Pvt. Ltd. ISBN 9781259062667. 
3. R.C. Hibbeler (2018) Structural Analysis (10th Ed), Pearson Education. ISBN 9780134610672. 
4. D. Menon (2018) Structural Analysis (2nd Ed), Narosa Publications. ISBN 9788184875973. 
 
Additional References 
Structural Analysis I (2009) by Prof. Siddhartha Ghosh and Prof. R.S. Jangid on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/101/105101085/ 
 
Laboratory  
Verification of moment area theorem for the slope and deflection of beam. 
Verification of Clerk-Maxwell’s reciprocal theorem. 

47 
 



Experimentally determining the elastic properties of an elastic beam. 
Experimental and analytical study of defections in a cantilever beam. 
To study the behaviour of struts and columns with various support end conditions. 
Determination of the deflection of a pin connected truss through analytical, graphically and experimental 
calculations. 
Determine the horizontal thrust in a three hinged arch for a given system of loads experimentally and verify 
it with theoretical calculations. 
Experimental and analytical study of sway in portal frame. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

48 
 



Title Reinforced Concrete Design Number CI2XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech. [CIE Type Program Core (PC) 
Prerequisite Structural Analysis   
Objectives 
This course aims at: 
1. Providing an in-depth knowledge on the behaviour of RCC structures.  
2. Highlighting the significance of working stress and limit state design methods.  
3. Comprehensive development of the design and reinforcement detailing of beams, columns, slabs, 

staircases, footings.  
4. Develop an understanding with respect to the importance of stiffness, strength, ductility and 

configuration which is useful for earthquake resistant design.  
5. Practicing reinforcement detailing procedures of a RCC building considering wind and seismic forces as 

per Indian Standard codes and developing design skills.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to: 
1. Assess the behaviour of RCC structures and apply the appropriate design methodology and 

reinforcement detailing for different types of RCC structural elements i.e. beams, columns, slabs, 
staircases, foundations etc.  

2. Design and provide reinforcement detailing of multistoried RCC buildings considering dead, wind and 
seismic forces as per Indian Standard codes.  

 
Contents 
Module 1(Lectures: 10) 
Introduction to reinforced concrete structures: Properties of concrete; codes of practices; design philosophy 
of reinforced concrete structures - working stress and limit state design methods.  
Design of RCC beams: Singly and doubly reinforced rectangular/flanged sections; design for shear, torsion, 
bond and anchorage of reinforcement; design of continuous beams. 
 
Module 2(Lectures: 8) 
Design of Slabs: One-way and two-way slabs; design of slabs for serviceability; design of continuous slab 
systems. 
Design of RCC staircase. 
 
Module 3(Lectures: 8) 
Design of RCC columns: design of short columns under pure compression, uniaxial and biaxial bending; 
design of long columns. 
 
Module 4(Lectures: 8) 
Design of foundations: Isolated footings; combined and strip footing; raft foundation.  
Design of retaining walls. 
 
Module 5(Lectures: 8) 
Design of RCC structures considering wind and seismic forces: Concept of earthquake resistant design of 
RCC structures - design philosophy, stiffness, strength, ductility and configurations; estimation of wind and 
seismic forces as per IS codes; ductile design and detailing of RCC earthquake resistant structures;  
Introduction to prestressed concrete.  
 
Text Books 
1. U.S. Pillai, D. Menon (2016) Reinforced Concrete Design (3rd Ed), Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Co. Ltd. 

ISBN 9780070141100. 
2. S.N. Sinha (2014) Reinforced Concrete Design (3rd Ed) McGraw Hill Education Pvt. Ltd. ISBN 

9789351342472. 
3. A.K. Jain (2012) Reinforced Concrete - Limit State Design (7th Ed), NemChand Brothers. ISBN 

9788185240664 

49 
 



4. P.C. Varghese (2010) Limit State Design of Reinforced Concrete (2nd Ed), Prentice Hall of India. ISBN 
8120320395. 

5. S.K. Mallick, A.K. Gupta (2002) Reinforced Concrete (2nd Ed), Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Co. Ltd. 
ISBN 0070473323. 

 
Additional References 
Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures (2009) by Dr. Nirjhar Dhang on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/105/105105105/ 
 
Laboratory Contents 
Introduction of computer applications in the structural design. 
Design of beam (under-reinforced, balanced, over-reinforced, doubly reinforced) using computer 
applications. 
Design and detailing of slabs (one-way and two-way), columns, walls, footing etc. 
Modelling, analysis and design of a multi-storeyed framed structure. 
Determination of the compressive strength of concrete. 
Strength and deflection testing of a simply supported RCC beam.  
Testing of RCC columns for strength subjected to concentric and eccentric loading conditions.  
Non-destructive testing – rebound hammer test for concrete, ultrasonic pulse velocity test for concrete, rebar 
detector test for reinforcement etc.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

50 
 



Title Advanced Structural Analysis Number CI2XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech. [CIE] Type PC 
Prerequisite Structural Analysis   
Objectives 
This course aims at: 
1. Introduction to advanced concepts of structural analysis and review the concepts of solid mechanics. 
2. Further development of analytical skills to compute quantities like displacements, stresses etc. in different 

structures subjected to static forces. 
3. Analytical and numerical methods as well as procedures in a way that emphasize physical insight. 
4. Gaining the basic understanding of structural stability and dynamics response. 
5. Problem solving ability for static and dynamic loads in structural engineering. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to: 
1. Analyze statically indeterminate trusses, beams and frames.  
2. Understand the fundamentals of the matrix formulation of structural analysis through finite element 

method. 
3. Determine bending moment, shear forces and axial force in the rigid frames subjected to lateral and 

vertical loads.  
4. Determine the dynamic response of simple structure under free vibration.   
5. Perform comprehensive methods of structural analysis on real-world problems of practical interest. 
6. Model real life structures for solving them in standard software and examine both local and global 

stability of the structural system. 
 
Contents 
Module 1 
Force method of analysis of indeterminate structures: Fixed and continuous beams, frames etc. - analysis by 
consistent deformation method; application of moment area and conjugate beam methods for fixed beams; 
theorem of three moments for continuous beams. (Lectures: 5) 
Displacement method of analysis of indeterminate structures: Analysis of continuous beams, beams with 
overhang, rigid frames with sloping legs, settlement effects etc.; moment distribution method as successive 
approximation of slope deflection equations. (Lectures: 5) 
Module 2 
Stress and strain tensors: Generalized strain displacement relationship; compatibility condition and 
constitutive relationship; plane stress and plain strain problems; some boundary value problems in elasticity; 
yield criterion. (Lectures: 7) 
Plastic analysis: Introduction to plastic theory; concept of plastic hinge; plastic modulus; shape factor; 
redistribution of moments; collapse mechanism; plastic analysis of beams and portal frames by equilibrium 
and mechanism methods. (Lectures: 5) 
Module 3 
Introduction to FEM: Energy methods and variational principles; generation of stiffness matrix of 1D and 2D 
elements by FEM approach; use of virtual work method for generating stiffness matrix of structure; matrix 
formulation of structural analysis. (Lectures: 6) 
Stability of structure: Concept of structural stability; classical stability analysis of beams and frames; energy 
method of the stability analysis of beams, frames and plates. (Lectures: 6) 
Module 4 
Introduction to structural dynamics: Basic concepts of dynamic loading and response; types of mass-spring-
damper system; equation of motion using direct equilibration, Hamilton’s principle. (Lectures: 2) 
Single-degree of freedom system: Development of equation of motion; statement of problem and solution; 
damped and undamped systems; free vibration response. (Lectures: 6) 
 
Text Books 
1. C. K Wang (2010) Intermediate Structural Analysis (1st Ed), Tata McGraw Hill. ISBN 9780070702493. 
2. S. Timoshenko, D.H. Young, J.V. Rao, S. Patil (2013) Engineering Mechanics (In SI Units) (5th Ed), Tata 

McGraw-Hill Education Pvt. Ltd. ISBN 9781259062667. 
3. R.C. Hibbeler (2018) Structural Analysis (10th Ed), Pearson Education. ISBN 9780134610672. 

51 
 



4. D. Menon (2018) Structural Analysis (2nd Ed), Narosa Publications. ISBN 9788184875973. 
5. J.B. Wilbur, C.H. Norris, S. Utku (2006) Elementary Structural Analysis, McGraw Hill, New York. ISBN 

9781258242909. 
6. A.K. Chopra (2017) Dynamics of Structures Theory and Application to Earthquake Engineering (5th Ed), 

Prentice Hall, NJ. ISBN 978-0-134-55512-6. 
 
Additional References 
Advanced Structural Analysis (2012) by Prof. Devdas Menon on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/106/105106050/  
 
Laboratory  
Introduction of computer applications in structural analysis. 
Create and analyze models to determine the shear force, bending moment, deflection diagrams for statically 
indeterminate beams. 
Create and analyze models to determine the shear force, bending moment, deflection diagrams for portal 
frames. 
Create and analyze models to determine the shear force, bending moment, deflection diagrams for multi 
storeyed buildings. 
Determine shear force, bending moment, deflection diagrams for multi-storey frames using approximate 
methods. 
Modelling and analysis of 3D structures. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

52 
 



Title Steel Structure Design Number CI4XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-1-0 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech. [CIE] Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite Structural Analysis   
Objectives 
This course aims at: 
1. Providing an in-depth knowledge on the behaviour of steel structures.  
2. Comprehensive development of the design and associated analysis of critical components such as joints, 

fasteners etc. 
3. Practicing limit state design of structural steel members subjected to compressive, tensile and bending 

loads, including connections as per Indian Standard codes.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to: 
1. Design bolted and welded connections for steel structures. 
2. Design tension members, understand the effect of shear lag and understand the design concept of axially 

loaded columns and column base connections. 
3. Understand specific problems related to the design of laterally restrained and unrestrained steel beams.  
4. Design structural systems such as roof trusses, gantry girders as per provisions of Indian Standard code 

for working stress and limit state methods. 
 
Contents 
Module 1: Introduction (Lectures: 7) 
Mechanical properties and types of structural steel; Indian structural steel products; brief on the steps 
involved in the design process of steel structural systems and their elements; type of loads; standards and 
specifications; concept of allowable stress method and limit state design methods for steel structures; relative 
advantages and limitations; strengths and serviceability.  
 
Module 2: Connections (Lectures: 9) 
Type of fasteners – rivets, bolts and welds; types of connections;relative advantages and limitations; modes 
of failure; concept of shear lag;prying forces and hanger connection; design of slip critical connections; design 
of joints; eccentrically loaded bolted bracket connections; welds; effective area of welds; fillet and but welded 
connections; axially loaded connections;eccentrically loaded bracket connections.  
 
Module 3: Tension members (Lectures: 8) 
Types of tension members and sections; behaviour of tension members modes of failure; slenderness ratio; 
net area; net effective sections for plates, angles etc. in tension; design of plate and angle tension members; 
design of built up tension members; connections in tension members; use of lug angles; design of tension 
splice.  
 
Module 4: Compression members (Lectures: 8) 
Types of compression members and sections;behaviour and types of failures; short and slender columns; 
effective length;design of single section and compound angles - axially loaded solid section columns 
subjected to biaxial bending; design of built up laced and battened type columns; design of column bases; 
plate and gusseted bases for axially loaded columns; splices for columns.  
 
Module 5: (Lectures: 10) 
Types of steel beam sections; behaviour of beams in flexure; classification of cross sections; flexural strength 
and lateral stability of beams; shear strength;web buckling, crippling and deflection of beams; design of 
laterally supported beams, solid rolled section beams, plated beams with cover plates, purlin in roof trusses, 
open web and hollow sections etc.  
 
Text Books 
1. N. Subramanian (2015) Design of Steel Structures, Oxford University Press.  ISBN 9780199460915. 
2. M.L. Gambhir (2013) Fundamentals of Structural Steel Design (1st Ed), McGraw Hill Publication. ISBN 

9781259006760. 

53 
 



3. S.K. Duggal (2019) Limit State Design of Steel Structures (3rd Ed), McGraw Hill Publication. ISBN 
9789353164874. 

4. K.S. Sai Ram (2015) Design of Steel Structures (2nd Ed), Pearson Education. ISBN 9789332542105. 
5. M.R. Shiyekar (2017) Limit State Design in Structural Steel (3rd Ed), Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd. ISBN 

9788120353503. 
 
Additional References 
Design of Steel Structures I (2009) by Prof. S.R. Satish Kumar and Prof. A.R. Santha Kumar on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/106/105106112/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

54 
 



Title Advanced Structural Design Number CI7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. [CIE], M Tech [CIE] Type PE 
Prerequisite Reinforced Concrete Design   
Objectives 
This course aims at: 
1. Providing in-depth advance knowledge on the behaviour of RCC and steel structures. 
2. Develop an understanding with respect to design of different structural components such as deep beam, 

shear wall etc.  
3. Practicing detailing procedures and developing design skills of RCC and steel structures using Indian and 

foreign standard codes.  
  
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to: 
1. Assess the behaviour of RCC and steel structures and apply the appropriate design methodology and 

reinforcement detailing for different types of RCC and steel structural elements.  
2. Design and provide detailing of multistoried RCC and steel buildings considering dead, wind and seismic 

forces as per Indian and international standard codes.  
 
Contents 
Module 1 
Review of basics concepts: Design philosophy, modelling of loads, material characteristics. (Lectures: 4) 
Durability and mix design of concrete. (Lectures: 4) 
Module 2 
Advanced reinforced concrete design: P-M, M-phi relationships, strut-and-tie method, design of deep beam 
and corbel; design using Indian, America and European standards. (Lectures: 9) 
Module 3 
Design of shear walls, compression field theory for shear design, design against torsion. (Lectures: 9) 
Module 4 
Advanced design of steel structures: Stability design; torsional buckling (pure, flexural and lateral); design 
using Indian and AISC Standards; Eurocode. (Lectures: 9) 
Module 5 
Design of beam-columns, fatigue resistant design, fire rating and minimum thickness etc. (Lectures: 7) 
  
Text Books 
1. P.C. Varghese (2005) Advanced Reinforced Concrete Design (2nd Ed), Prentice Hall of India 
2. C.-K. Wang, C.H. Solomon, J. A. Pincheira (2007) Reinforced Concrete Design (7th Ed), John Wiley and 

Sons. 
3. J.G. MacGregor, J.K. Wight (2008) Reinforced Concrete: Mechanics and Design (5th Ed), Pearson 

Education. 
4. U.S. Pillai, D. Menon (2016) Reinforced Concrete Design (3rd Ed), Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Co. Ltd. 

ISBN 9780070141100. 
5. N. Subramanian (2015) Design of Steel Structures, Oxford University Press.  ISBN 9780199460915. 
 
Additional References 
1. Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures (2009) by Dr. Nirjhar Dhang on NPTEL. 

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/105/105105105/ 
2. Design of Steel Structures I (2009) by Prof. S.R. Satish Kumar and Prof. A.R. Santha Kumar on NPTEL. 

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/106/105106112/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

55 
 



Title Dynamics of Structure Number CI4XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. [CIE] Type PE 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
This course aims at: 
1. Introducing the behaviour of structures (especially framed building) to various dynamic loads, viz. 

earthquake, machine vibration etc. 
2. Fundamental understanding to analyze structures subjected to dynamic excitation and computing 

quantities like displacements, forces, stresses etc. 
3. Analytical and numerical methods as well as procedures in a way that emphasize physical insight. 
4. Problem solving ability for dynamic response in Civil Engineering design. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to: 
1. Establish dynamic equilibrium and equation of motion for structural systems. 
2. Analyze the dynamic response and stress generation in single and multi degree of freedom systems for 

different types of loading. 
3. Implement the basis for the classical energy formulations in dynamical systems. 
4. Model structural damping and solve problems in frequency as well as time domain. 
5. Solve the eigenvalue problems and gain knowledge on its useful properties. 
6. Device methods to protect new and existing structures against seismic collapse. 
7. Apply the structural dynamics theory to real-world problems like seismic analysis and design of 

structures. 
 
Contents 
Module 1 
Introduction to dynamics of structure: Review of basic concepts of dynamic loading and response; degrees 
of freedom; types of mass-spring-damper system; equation of motion using direct equilibration, principle of 
virtual displacement and Hamilton’s principle. (Lectures: 3) 
Single-degree of freedom system: Development of equation of motion; statement of problem and solution; 
damped and undamped systems; free vibration response; logarithmic decrement. (Lectures: 5) 
Module 2 
Solution of different loading cases: Responses to harmonic, periodic, arbitrary, pulse etc. excitations; 
numerical evaluation; generalized system. (Lectures: 8) 
Module 3 
Two-degree of freedom system: Development of equation of motion; statement of problem and solution 
methods; free vibration response; damping; natural vibration frequencies and modes; computation of 
vibration properties. (Lectures: 10) 
Module 4 
Multiple degree of freedom system: Solving problems with more than two degrees of freedom systems; static 
condensation. (Lectures: 6) 
Damping in structures: Estimating modal damping ratios; construction of damping matrix. (Lectures: 3) 
Module 5 
Introduction to Earthquake response: Response of linear elastic building subjected to seismic excitation; basic 
concepts of vibration control. (Lectures: 7) 
 
Text Books 
1. J.M. Biggs (1964) Introduction to Structural Dynamics, McGraw Hill, NY. ISBN 07-005255-7. 
2. R.W. Clough and J. Penzien (1993) Dynamics of Structures (2nd Ed), McGraw Hill Inc Editor. ISBN 0-07-

011392-0. 
3. A.K. Chopra (2017) Dynamics of Structures Theory and Application to Earthquake Engineering (5th Ed), 

Prentice Hall, NJ. ISBN 978-0-134-55512-6. 
4. A.K. Jain (2017) Dynamics of Structures with MATLAB® Applications, Pearson Education, Chennai, 

India. ISBN 978-9-332-55855-7 
5. M. Paz and Y.H. Kim (2019) Structural Dynamics Theory and Computation (6th Ed), Springer Nature, 

Switzerland. ISBN 978-3-319-94742-6. 

56 
 



 
Additional References 
Structural Dynamics (2012) by Dr. Pradipta Banerji on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/101/105101006/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

57 
 



Title Finite Element Method Number CI7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. [CIE], M Tech [CIE] Type Program elective (PE) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
This course aims at: 
1. Introduction to fundamental concepts of finite element analysis. 
2. Development of analytical skills to compute quantities like displacements, stresses etc. in structures 

subjected to static and dynamic forces. 
3. Analytical and numerical methods as well as procedures in a way that emphasize physical insight. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to: 
1. Establish equilibrium equations of structural systems. 
2. Analyze the responses and stresses generated in structures subjected to different types of static loading. 
3. Apply the FEM to solve real-world problems of the building, bridges etc. 
 
Contents 
Module 1(Lectures: 6) 
Fundamental concepts: Introduction to FEM; stresses and equilibrium; boundary conditions; strain-
displacement and stress-strain relations; governing equation and its solution approximations (e.g. 
Collocation, Least Squares, Galerkin’s method, the Ritz method).  
 
Module 2(Lectures: 10) 
Introduction to calculus of variations: Functionals; extremization; variational form from differential equation; 
principle of virtual work and minimum potential energy. 
Concept of discretization of structures and shape functions; Lagrangian and serendipity elements; 
isoparametric formulation.  
 
Module 3(Lectures: 9) 
Analysis of framed structures: plane stress and plane strain problems; axisymmetric problems; 3D stress 
analysis.  
 
Module 4(Lectures: 10) 
Analysis of plate and shell.  
Numerical integration: Numerical integration formulae; order of integration; error analysis and convergence.  
 
Module 5(Lectures: 7) 
Programming applications: Computer implementations of algorithms. 
Application of FEM in dynamics: Eigenvalues and orthogonality.  
 
Text Books 
1. J.N. Reddy (2003) An Introduction to the Finite Element Method (2nd Ed), Tata McGraw Hill. 
2. C.S. Krishnamoorthy (1994) Finite Elements Analysis: Theory and Programming (2nd Ed), Tata McGraw 

Hill. 
3. R.D. Cook, D.S. Malkus, M.E. Plesha (2002) Concepts and Applications of Finite Element Analysis (4th 

Ed), John Wiley & Sons. 
4. O.C. Zienkiewicz, R.L. Taylor, J.Z. Zhu (2005) Finite Element Method Its Basis and Fundamentals (6th Ed), 

Elsevier 
5. S.S. Rao (1999) Finite Element Method in Engineering (3rd Ed), Butterworth Heinemann. 
6. K.J. Bathe (2002) Finite Element Procedures, Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

58 
 



Title Earthquake Engineering Number CI7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. [CIE], M Tech [CIE] Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
This course aims at: 
1. Introduction to fundamental concepts of earthquake analysis. 
2. Development of analytical skills to compute quantities like displacements, stresses etc. in structures 

subjected to ground motions. 
3. Analytical and numerical methods as well as procedures in a way that emphasize physical insight. 
4. Problem solving ability for dynamics loads in seismic design of structures. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to: 
1. Establish equilibrium equation of structural systems subjected to ground motion based excitations. 
2. Analyze the responses and stresses generated in structures subjected to seismic loading. 
3. Apply the frequency and time analysis methods to solve problems of the building, bridges etc. due to 

seismic activity. 
 
Contents 
Module 1(Lectures: 10) 
Basic of earthquake engineering: Cause and source of earthquakes; magnitude and intensity; ground motions; 
site effects; sensors; equation of motion.  
Response spectrum: Construction of response spectrum; response spectrum characteristics; design of 
response spectrum.  
 
Module 2(Lectures: 9) 
Linear earthquake analysis: Idealization of structures; response spectrum analysis; coupled systems; 
frequency domain analysis; time domain analysis. 
 
Module 3(Lectures: 8) 
Nonlinear earthquake analysis: Force-deformation relationships; equation of motion for nonlinear system; 
controlling parameters. 
 
Module 4(Lectures: 8) 
Earthquake resistance design: Philosophy of ductility based design; detailing provisions; concepts of passive 
controls.  
 
Module 5(Lectures: 7) 
Geotechnical aspects: Dynamic properties of soil; dynamic earth pressures; liquefaction and ground 
improvement techniques; retrofitting and strengthening of buildings and bridges.  
 
Text Books 
1. R.W. Clough and J. Penzien (1993) Dynamics of Structures (2nd Ed), McGraw Hill 
2. M. Paz (1987) Dynamics of Structures, CBS Publication. 
A. K. Chopra (2007) Dynamics of Structures - Theory and Application to Earthquake Engineering (3rd Ed), 

Pearson Education. 
3. T. Paulay and M.S.N. Priestley (1992) Seismic Design of Reinforced Concrete and Masonry Buildings, John 

Wiley and Sons. 
4. D. J. Dowrick (1987) Earthquake Resistant Design for Engineers and Architects, John Wiley and Sons. 
 
Additional References 
Introduction to Earthquake Engineering (2013) by Prof. R.S. Jangid on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/101/105101004/ 

 
 
 

59 
 



Title Concrete Technology Number CI4XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-3 [4.5] 
Offered for B.Tech. [CIE] Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
This course aims at: 
Introduction to fundamental concepts and physical insight of cement concrete. 
Development of skills for mix design of concrete with admixtures. 
Comprehensive understanding of chemical and physical processes attached to the cement concrete. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to: 
Mix design the concrete based on different material properties to attain desired quality control. 
Use admixtures for designing concrete with different applications. 
Understand the behaviour of cement concrete and its performance in presence of admixtures and 
environmental exposures 
 
Contents 
Module 1(Lectures: 8) 
Introduction to materials: Concrete materials; cement - physical tests; hydration; Bogues equation; 
aggregates; water - quality for mixing and curing.  
 
Module 2(Lectures: 8) 
Admixtures: Introduction to admixtures, types of admixtures; accelerating admixtures; retarding admixtures; 
air entraining admixtures; plasticizers.  
Batching, mixing and transportation; placing of concrete; curing of concrete. 
 
Module 3(Lectures: 10) 
Mix Design of concrete: Factors influencing mix proportion; mix design methods; design of high strength 
concrete; strength of concrete - important factors.  
 
Module 4(Lectures: 9) 
Properties of concrete: Interfacial transition zone; microstructure of concrete; shrinkage and temperature 
effects; creep; permeability; durability; thermal properties; micro-cracking.  
 
Module 5(Lectures: 7) 
Advanced topics: Introduction to special concrete; lightweight concrete; fiber reinforced concrete; polymer 
modified concrete; Ferrocement; ready mix concrete; self compacting concrete.  
Quality control: Sampling and testing; acceptance criteria.  
 
Text Books 
A. Neville (2011) Properties of Concrete (5th Ed), Pearson Education India. ISBN 9788131791073. 
M. L. Gambhir (2017) Concrete Technology (5th Ed), McGraw Hill Education. ISBN 9781259062551. 
M.S. Shetty, A.K.  Jain (2019) Concrete Technology: Theory and Practice (8th Ed), S. Chand Publishing. ISBN 
9789352533800. 
A.M. Neville, J.J. Brooks (2010) Concrete Technology (2nd Ed), Pearson Education. ISBN 9780273732198. 
P.K. Mehta, P.J.M. Monteiro (2014) Concrete: Microstructure, Properties, and Materials (4th Ed), McGraw 
Hill. ISBN 9789339204761. 
 
Additional References 
Concrete Technology (2014) by Dr. B. Bhattacharjee on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/102/105102012/ 
 
Laboratory Contents 
Determination of fineness and specific gravity of cement.  
Determination of consistency of standard cement paste.  
Determination of initial and final setting times of cement.  

60 
 



Determination of compressive strength of cement. 
Determination of soundness of cement by Le-Chatelier’s apparatus. 
Workability tests: slump cone test, compaction factor test, Vee-Bee consistometer and flow test.  
Determination of compressive strength of concrete specimens.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

61 
 



Title Prestressed Concrete Structures Number CI7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. [CIE], M Tech [CIE] Type PE 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
This course aims at: 
Fundamental understanding of the behaviour of prestressed concrete structures. 
Developing skills for analysis and design of prestressed sections in beams, columns, bridges etc. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to: 
Assess the effect of losses and forces such as axial, flexure, shear and torsion in prestressing. 
Design the beams, columns, bridge decks etc. based on prestressed concrete.  
 
Contents 
Module 1 
Introduction to prestressing system: Basics of prestressed concrete structures and advantages; types of 
prestressing; pre- and post-tensioning systems and devices; review of concrete - properties; prestressing steel 
– forms, types and properties. (Lectures: 8) 
Module 2 
Losses in prestress: Elastic shortening; friction; anchorage slip; force variation; creep; shrinkage. (Lectures: 3) 
Analysis of members: Analysis under axial load - permissible prestress based on transfer, stresses under 
service loads, ultimate strength of member; Analysis of members under flexure – at transfer and service, 
calculation of cracking moment, location of kern points and pressure lines, ultimate strength. (Lectures: 5) 
Module 3 
Design of member sections: For axial tension; flexure – type 1 and type 2; choice of section; limiting zone; 
Magnel’s graphical method; tendon profile and reinforcement detailing. (Lectures: 7) 
Analysis and design for shear and torsion: Cracks and modes of failure due to shear and torsion; effect of 
prestressing force; limit state of collapse for shear and torsion; design of longitudinal and transverse 
reinforcement. (Lectures: 6) 
Module 4 
Deflection, camber and crack width: Deflection due to gravity load and prestressing; camber; determination 
of flexural crack width; limits of deflection and crack width. (Lectures: 3) 
Transmission of prestress: Pre- and post-tensioned members. (Lectures: 2) 
Analysis and tendon profile of cantilever and continuous beams. (Lectures: 3) 
Miscellaneous topics: Design of composite sections, one- and two-way slabs, compression members etc. 
(Lectures: 5) 
 
Text Books 
C.W. Dolan, H.R. Hamilton (2019) Prestressed Concrete Building, Design, and Construction, Springer. ISBN 
9783319978819. 
N. Krishna Raju (2006) Prestressed Concrete (3rd Ed), Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Ltd. ISBN 
0070634440. 
E.G. Nawy (2005) Prestressed Concrete – A Fundamental Approach (5th Ed), Pearson. ISBN 9780131497597.  
 
Additional References 
Prestressed Concrete Structures (2009) by Prof. Amlan K. Sengupta and Prof. Devdas Menon on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/106/105106117/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

62 
 



Title Prefabricated Structures Number CI7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Engineering 
Offered for B.Tech. [CIE], M Tech [CIE] Type PE 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
This course aims at: 
Imparting knowledge on modular construction, industrialised construction and design of prefabricated 
elements and construction methods. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to: 
Understand the design, transportation and erection steps required in the prefabricated structures. 
Understand the concepts of joint flexibility and deformation for different types of joints and connections. 
 
Contents 
Module 1 
Introduction to prefabricated structures: Need for prefabrication and its principles; prefabrication materials 
for precast elements; modular coordination; standardization; systems; production; transportation; site 
erection; quality control. (Lectures: 8) 
Module 2 
Prefabricated components: Behaviour of structural components, large panel constructions; construction of 
roof and floor slabs; wall panels; columns; shear walls. (Lectures: 9) 
Module 3 
Design principles: Disuniting of structures; design of cross section based on efficiency of material; problems 
in design because of joint flexibility; allowance for joint deformation. (Lectures: 9) 
Module 4 
Joint in structural members: Joints for different structural connections; dimensions and detailing; design of 
expansion joints. (Lectures: 8) 
Module 5 
Design for extreme loads: Progressive collapse; codal provisions; equivalent design loads for considering 
effects such as earthquakes, cyclones etc.; importance of avoidance of progressive collapse. (Lectures: 8) 
 
Reference Books/ Reports 
H. Bachmann, A. Steinle (2011) Precast Concrete Structures, Wilhelm Ernst & Sohn. ISBN 9783433029602.  
Precast Concrete Connection Details - Structural Design Manual (1978), Society for Studies on the use of 
Precast Concrete, Netherlands. 
K.S. Elliott (2002) Precast Concrete Structures, Butterworth-Heinemann. ISBN 0750650842.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

63 
 



Title  Highway Geometric Design Number CI4XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Engineering 
Offered for B.Tech. [CIE] Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The course will help students to understand the concepts involved in geometric design of intersections, 
horizontal & vertical alignment of roads & pedestrian facilities. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
At the end of the course, the student should be able to: 
Describe the urban street hierarchy and functional classification system.  
Demonstrate the relationship between mobility and access and formulate a functional design process that 
accommodates the needs of all users and allows for street designs that are compatible with the surrounding 
area.  
Identify and define the elements of a roadway cross-section.  
Design alignment and grade elements including sight distance; horizontal and vertical curves; and terrain 
and acceptance grades for urban local and collector streets.  
Define the functional area of an intersection and identify key design elements for intersections. 
Identify pedestrian street crossing issues. 
Understand  the design concepts of smart city roads 
 
Contents 
MODULE I:[Lectures – 9] 
Highway Cross Section Elements and Geometric Design: Functional Classification of Highway System; 
Design Control characteristics, Objectives and elements of Geometric Design, Pavement Surface 
characteristics, Camber, Objectives of Camber, design standards. 
 
MODULE II: Lectures – 12] 
Horizontal and Vertical Alignment: Objectives of horizontal curves, Super elevation, Minimum Radius of 
Curve, Extra widening on Curves, Transition Curves, Types of Gradients, Vertical Curves – Types and 
Design, Grade Compensation, Sight Distances, Importance of Sight Distances for Horizontal and Vertical 
Curves. 
 
MODULE III:[Lectures – 8] 
Intersection Design: Types of Intersections; Design Principles for Intersections; Design of At-grade 
Intersections – Channelization, Objective; Traffic Islands and Design standards; Rotary Intersection – Concept 
and Design, Advantages and Disadvantages; Grade separated Interchanges – Types, warrants and Design 
standards 
 
MODULE IV:[Lectures -5] 
Traffic signs and road markings: Types of Road Signs; Guidelines for the provision of Road Signs; Cautionary 
Signs, Regulatory Signs, Information Signs – Design standards; Road markings – Objective of Road Markings; 
Types of Road Markings; Role of Road markings in Road Safety and Traffic Regulation; Specification for Road 
Markings. Highway Appurtenances – Delineators, Traffic Impact Attenuators, Safety Barriers. 
 
MODULE V: [Lectures -8] 
Miscellaneous Elements: Requirements of Pedestrians; Pedestrian facilities on Urban Roads; Cycle Tracks – 
Guidelines and Design standards; Bus bays – Types and Guidelines; Design of On-street and Off-street 
Parking facilities – Guidelines for lay out Design; Design concepts of smart city roads 
 
Text Books 
L.R. Kadiyali and N.B. Lal, Principles and Practice of Highway Engineering, Khanna Publications 
C.E.G. Justo and S.K. Khanna, Highway Engineering, Nem Chand and Brothers. 
 
Additional References 
IRC Codes for Signs, Markings and Mixed Traffic Control in Urban Areas. 

64 
 



Traffic Engineering and Transportation Planning, L.R.Kadiyali, Khanna Publications. 
Chai K. Toh, Julio A. Sanguesa, Juan C. Cano and Francisco J. Martinez. Advances in smart roads for future 
smart cities. 
https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rspa.2019.0439 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

65 
 



Title Pavement Engineering Number CI4XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. [CIE] Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The course will help students to understand about the materials, analysis, design, and construction of 
different types of pavements. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
At the end of the course, the student should be able to: 
Characterize the response characteristics of soil, aggregate, asphalt, and asphalt mixes  
Analyze flexible pavements  
Analyze rigid pavements   
Design a flexible pavement using IRC and AASHTO methods  
Design a rigid pavement using IRC, and AASHTO methods.  
Contents 
Module 1 :Pavement Materials [Lectures – 10] 
Types and component parts of pavements, highway and airport pavements, Materials used in pavements, 
basic soil properties relevant to pavement applications, resilient modulus, and modulus of subgrade reaction, 
Physical properties of aggregates and blending, Basic properties of bitumen, polymer and rubber modified 
bitumen, Dynamic modulus, flow time and flow number of bituminous mixes. Cement: chemical 
composition, types, physical properties. Distresses in flexible and rigid pavements. Use of geosynthetics in 
pavements.  
 
Module II: Analysis & Stresses in Pavements [Lectures – 12] 
Stresses in flexible pavements: layered system concepts, stress solution for one, two and three-layered 
systems, fundamental design concepts. Stresses in rigid pavements: Westergaard’s theory and assumptions, 
stresses due to curling, stresses and deflections due to loading, frictional stresses, stresses in dowel bars and 
tie bars. 
 
Module III: Factors Affecting Pavement Design [Lectures – 12] 
Variables considered in pavement design, Classification of axle types, articulated commercial vehicles, legal 
axle and gross weights on single and multiple units, tyre pressure, contact pressure, ESWL, EWLF and EAL 
concepts, Traffic analysis: ADT, AADT, growth factor, lane distribution, directional distribution and vehicle 
damage factors. 
 
Module IV: Design of Pavements [Lectures -8] 
IRC method of flexible pavement design, IRC methods of rigid pavement design, AASHTO method of flexible 
pavement design, AASHTO method of rigid pavement design 
 
Text Books 
Yoder and Witezak, Principles of Pavement Design, John Wiley and sons.  
Harold N. Atkins, Highway Materials, Soils, and Concrete, Prentice Hall 
IRC: 37-2012, Guidelines for the Design of Flexible Pavements, The Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi, India 
IRC: 58-2011, Guidelines for the Design of Plain Jointed Rigid Pavements for Highways, The Indian Roads 
Congress, New Delhi, India 
 
Additional References 
Yang, Design of functional pavements, McGraw-Hill.  
Robert D. Krebs, Highway Materials, McGraw Hill Text 
Asphalt Institute, The Asphalt Handbook 
RRL, DSIR, Concrete Roads, HMSO, IRC Publications 
Huang, Y.H. Pavement Analysis and Design, Second Edition, Dorling Kindersley (India) Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi 
Mallick, R.B. and T. El-Korchi Pavement Engineering – Principles and Practice, CRC Press, Taylor and Francis 
Group, Florida, USA7.  
Papagiannakis, A.T. and E.A. Masad Pavement Design and Materials, John Wiley and Sons, New Jersey, USA, 
2008.  

66 
 



Title Traffic system and ITS Number CI4XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. [CIE] Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite    
 
Objectives 
The course will help students to understand the working and control of traffic engineering elements and its 
integration with advanced technologies such as ITS. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
At the end of the course, the student should be able to: 
Analyse the road traffic characteristics and can undertake various types of road traffic studies 
Suggest and design appropriate control measures for traffic congestion management 
Understand the role of ANN and fuzzy logic in traffic control measures 
Understand the fundamentals and taxonomy of Intelligent Transport System (ITS) and ITS user services 
Understand the integration of ITS to transportation planning 
Have knowledge on various public transportation systems. 
 
Contents 
MODULE I: [No. of lectures – 10] 
Traffic system characteristics: Road, User and Vehicle characteristic Traffic studies: Volume studies, Origin-
Destination Studies; Speed studies, Parking studies, Accident studies 
 
MODULE II: [No. of lectures – 12] 
Traffic control devices: Definition, necessity, types; Road signs and markings definition, classification. Traffic 
signals - location, types, signal design by IRC method, Websters methods and HCM method, ANN and Fuzzy 
logic concepts in traffic control 
 
MODULE III: [No. of lectures – 15]: 
Intelligent Transport System [ITS]: Introduction, ITS user services - Travel and traffic management, Public 
Transport operations, Electronic payment, Commercial vehicle operation, Advanced vehicle control and 
safety system, Emergency management, Information management, Maintenance and construction 
management; ITS architecture and planning; Integration of ITS into transportation planning 
 
MODULE IV: [No. of lectures -5] 
Public Transportation System: Evolution of public transport system, Need and benefits; Classifications; Rapid 
Transit systems- BRTS, MRTS, Intermediate Public Transport; Public Transport system in India 
 
Text Books 
Nicholas J Garber and Lester A Hoel. Traffic and Highway Engineering. Copyright: Brooks/Cole-Wadsworth 
Group\Thomson learning 
Fred. L. Mannering, Walter P. Kilareski, and Scott S. Washburn. Principles of Highway Engineering and 
Traffic Analysis. Copyright: John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
M A Chowdhary and A Sadek. Fundamentals of Intelligent Transportation systems planning. Artech House 
Inc., US, 2003. 
Bob Williams. Intelligent transportation systems standards. Artech House, London, 2008 
Sussman, J. Perspectives on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS). New York, NY: Springer, 2005 
Daganzo, C. F. and Quyang, Y. Public Transportation Systems: Principles of system design, operations 
planning and real-time control. World Scientific Publishers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

67 
 



Title Urban Transportation Planning Number CI4XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. [CIE] Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The course will provide students in-depth understanding on designing, conducting, and   administering 
surveys to provide the data required for transportation planning and will make them understand travel 
demand modelling procedures. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
At the end of the course, the student should be able to: 
Design, conduct, and administer surveys to provide the data required for transportation planning 
Develop and calibrate trip generation rates for specific types of land use developments.  
Estimate the traffic impact of new developments using the four-stage sequential models.  
Assess the impact of the transportation project on the land use 
 
Contents 
Module I: Urban Transportation Planning Process & Concepts [Lectures-9]: 
Role of Transportation and Changing Concerns of Society in Transportation Planning; Transportation 
Problems and Problem Domain; Objectives and Constraints; Flow Chart for Transportation Planning Process- 
Inventory, Model Building, Forecasting and Evaluation Stages, Planning in System Engineering Framework; 
Concept of Travel Demand and its Modelling based on Consumer Behaviour of Travel Choices- Independent 
Variables, Travel Attributes.  
 
Module II: Travel demand estimation [Lectures – 13] 
Assumptions in Demand Estimation- Sequential, Recursive and Simultaneous Process - Introduction to 
Transportation Planning Practices; Definition of Study Area, Zoning. Trip Generation Analysis: Trip 
Generation Models- Zonal Models, Category analysis, Household Models, Trip Attractions of Work Centres 
& Commercial Trips Trip Distribution Analysis: Trip End and Trip Interchange Models; Trip Distribution 
Models - Growth Factor Models, Gravity Models, Opportunity Models and their calibration; Estimation of 
Travel Demand based on link volume philosophy.  
 
Module III: Mode Split and Route Split analysis [Lectures -13] 
Mode Split Analysis- Mode Choice Behaviour, Competing Modes, Mode Split Curves, Probabilistic Models 
and Two Stage Mode Split Analysis; Route Split Analysis- Elements of Transportation Networks, Coding, 
Minimum Path Trees, Diversion Curves, All-or-Nothing Assignment, Capacity Restrained Assignment, 
Multipath Assignment  
 
Module IV: Landuse-Transportation Models: [Lectures -7] 
Location models - Opportunity Models, Lowry based Landuse-Transportation Models – Allocation Function, 
Constraints, Travel Demand Estimation – Iterative Solutions, Matrix Formulation, Dynamic and 
Disaggregated extensions. 
 
Text Books 
Hutchinson, B.G., Principles of Urban Transportation System Planning, Mc-Graw Hill   
Khisty, C J., Transportation Engineering – An Introduction, Prentice-Hall, NJ  
Kanafani, A., Transportation Demand Analysis, McGraw-Hill.  
 
Additional references 
Wilson, A.G, Urban and Regional Models in Geography and Planning, John Wiley and Sons. 
Dickey, J.W., Metropolitan Transportation Planning, Tata Mc-Graw Hill 1980  
ITE (1982), 'Transportation and Traffic Engineering Hand Book', Chapters 10,12, and 17, Prentice Hall, New 
Jersey  
Oppenheim, N., Applied Models in Urban and Regional Analysis, Prentice-Hall, NJ.  
Dickey J.W., et. al., Metropolitan Transportation Planning, Tata McGraw-Hill.  
Gallion A.B and Eisner S., The Urban Pattern, Affiliated East-West Press, New Delhi. 
 

68 
 



Title Geology for Civil Engineers Number CI4XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech [CIE] Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
Introducing geological materials, forces, and processes that influence the design and execution of a variety of 
civil and infrastructure engineering projects and their safety. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
After completing this course a student would be able to 
Identify different minerals and rocks based on their easily determined properties. 
Understand different erosional and depositional activities and landforms associated with streams, glacier 
movement, ocean activity, and wind activity.  
Measure strength and elastic properties of different rocks and classify them as per engineering needs. 
Understand the activities related to earthquakes, landslides, and volcanoes that can create hazards to 
engineering structures. 
Undertake basic engineering geological investigation and prepare and comprehensive site investigation 
report. 
 
Content 
Module I: Basics of Geology[Lectures: 7] 
Rock types and minerals; Geological time scale;dating methods; Mechanisms of deformation; Folds, faults, 
and joints; Primary structures of sedimentary rocks; Potential problems from rock structures in engineering 
construction. 
 
Module II: Geological Processes[Lectures: 13] 
Streams: Development stages; Classification of streams; Stream channels; Channel morphology; Drainage 
basin; Basin morphology; Geologic work of streams; Fluvial landforms.  
Glaciers: Glaciers; Glacier movement; Glacial processes; Erosional landforms; Depositional landforms.  
Ocean: Features of an ocean; The ocean sediments; Shore processes; Coastal erosion and sediment transport; 
Depositional features.  
Wind: Processes of wind erosion; Sediment transport; Erosional landforms; Depositional landforms.  
 
Module III: Natural Hazards[Lectures: 10] 
Earthquakes: Locating an earthquake; measure; World distribution; Important of plate boundaries; 
Earthquake hazards.  
Volcanoes: Volcanic features; Magma types; Geographic distribution of volcanoes; Mode of eruption; 
Volcanic explosivity Index; Submarine volcano; Volcanic landforms.  
Landslides: Causes of landslides; Types of landslides; Kinetic and kinematic methods of investigation; 
Hazard zonation mapping; Landslide hazard mitigation; Statistical investigation of landslide.  
 
Module IV: Site Geology[Lectures: 12] 
Engineering Properties of Rocks: Weathering of rock; Common properties of rocks; Strength and elastic 
properties of rocks; Rock mass properties; Rock Mass Rating; Geological Strength Index.  
Site Investigation and: Stages of site investigation; Aerial photography and remote sensing; Geophysical 
investigation; Subsoil exploration and sampling of soils; Methods of subsoil exploration; Exploratory drilling; 
Water pumping tests.  
Writing Engineering Geology Report: Objective of a report; Basic aspects; Geologic inputs; Different phases 
of site investigation; Special investigation; in-field preparation.  
 
Textbooks 
S. Gangopadhyay (2013). Engineering Geology. Oxford University Press. ISBN-13: 978-0-19-808635-2. 
Sreepat Jain (2014) Fundamentals of Physical geology. Springer. ISBN 978-81-322-1539-4. 
 
Other Reference Material 
B. Singh, R. K. Goel.(2011)Engineering Rock Mass Classification. Elsevier. ISBN 978-0-12-385878-8. 

69 
 



R. E. Hunt () Geologic Hazards: A Field Guide for Geotechnical Engineers. CRC Press: Taylor & Francis 
Group. ISBN‐13: 978‐1‐4200‐5250‐3. 
 
Online course Material 
Prof. Debasis Deb (2009) Engineering Geology. NPTEL. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/105/105105106/# 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70 
 



Title Ground Improvement Techniques Number CI4XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech [CIE] Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
This course aims at : 
Introducing the need for ground improvement and available techniques. 
Introducing the aspects of soil shear strength modification for effective design of foundations. 
Introducing recent soil modification techniques.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to 
Apply the ground modification techniques for efficient design of foundations 
Utilize the concepts of preloading and dewatering in soils of cohesive nature 
Stabilize the soils using different mechanical and chemical approaches 
 
Contents 
Module 1 [Lectures: 10] 
Classical examples of soil failure, need of ground improvement, In-situ densification methods, in situ 
densification of granular and cohesive soils; vibration at ground surface and at depth 
 
Module 2 [Lectures: 10] 
Preloading and dewatering, prefabricated vertical drains (PVDs), sand drains, geodrains, filter requirements, 
spacing effects, stone columns, sumps and interceptor ditches, single and multi-stage well points, vacuum 
well points, horizontal wells,electro osmosis. 
 
Module 3 [Lectures: 10] 
Stabilization of soils, methods of soil stabilization- mechanical, cement, lime,bitumen and polymer 
stabilization, use of industrial wastes like fly ash and granulated blast furnace slag, Reinforced Earth 
Technology, concept of soil reinforcement; reinforcing materials; backfill criteria; design of reinforcement for 
internal stability; applications of reinforced earth structures 
 
Module 4 [Lectures: 10] 
 
Grouting techniques, types of grouts, grouting equipment and machinery, injection methods, grout 
monitoring, stabilization with cement, lime and chemicals,stabilization of expansive soils, geosynthetics, type 
of geosynthetics, geotextiles, geomembranes and gabions, miscellaneous methods-soil nailing, thermal 
methods 
 
Text Books 
Hausmann, M.R. (1990). Engineering Principles of Ground Modification, McGraw-Hill International 
Editions. ISBN: 9780070272798. 
Dr. Purushottama Raj (2005). Ground Improvement Techniques. Laxmi Publications. ISBN: 9788170088370. 
Budhu. M (2012). Soil Mechanics and Foundations (3rd Ed). John Wiley and Sons. ISBN: 978-0-470-55684-9. 
 
Online references 
Ground Improvement Techniques by Prof. G.L. Sivakumar Babu on NTPEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/108/105108075/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

71 
 



Title Introduction to Soil Dynamics Number CI4XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech [CIE] Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
This course aims at : 
1. Introducing basic concepts of soil dynamics. 
2. Understanding the challenges involved in design of foundations subjected to dynamic loads. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to 
1. Evaluate the stresses in soils due to dynamic loads 
2. Analyze the dynamic behavior of soils through laboratory and field tests 
3. Apply the principles of earthquake geotechnology in foundation design 
 
Contents 
Module 1 [Lectures: 8] 
Nature of dynamic loads, vibration theory, single and two-degree freedom systems, free and forced 
vibrations, wave propagation in elastic rods, shear and compressional velocities  
  
Module 2 [Lectures: 10] 
Behavior of cyclically loaded soils, small and large strain dynamic soil properties, laboratory element tests 
and field tests, design principles for machine foundations, Elastic homogeneous half-space and lumped 
parameter solutions, codal recommendations 
  
Modules 3 [Lectures: 12] 
Earthquake geotechnology, causes and effects of earthquakes, strong ground motion, measurement, 
characterization and estimation, theory of amplification, ground response analysis, seismic liquefaction and 
mitigation techniques, seismic hazard assessment, microzonation, earthquake early warning systems  
  
Module 4 [Lectures: 12] 
Seismic slope stability, seismic earth pressures on retaining structures, bearing capacity of foundations 
against seismic loads, introduction to soil-structure and soil-pipe interaction, seismic vibration isolation and 
damping systems for foundations and structures 
 
Text Books 
1. Kramer S.L. (1996). Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering. Prentice Hall, ISBN-10: 8131707180 
2. Ishihara, K. (1996). Soil Behavior in Earthquake Geotechnics, Oxford Science Publications, ISBN-

10: 0198562241 
3. Prakash S. (1981). Soil dynamics. McGraw-Hill, ISBN-10: 0070506582 
 
Online video lecture 
Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering by Prof. Deepankar Choudhury on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/101/105101134/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

72 
 



Title Advanced Geotechnical Engineering Number CI7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech [CIE], M Tech [CIE] Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite Geotechnical Engineering (PC)   
Objectives 
This course aims at: 
Introducing basic principles of soil mechanics and foundation design. 
Understanding the complex response of soils to isotropic and anisotropic loading conditions. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to 
1. Assess the stress-strain response of soils to practical loading scenario 
2. Draw stress paths and utilize them for applications in geotechnical engineering 
3. Design shallow and pile foundations based on stress transfer mechanism 
4. Assess the stability of retaining walls and slopes under different loading conditions. 
 
Contents 
Module 1 [Lectures: 6] 
Geotechnical lessons learnt from failures-case studies, brief review of soil behavior under different loading 
conditions, normal stresses and strains, volumetric stresses shear stresses and strains, elastic state and 
anisotropy, total and effective stresses  
 
Module 2 [Lectures: 12] 
Stress path, stress and strain invariants, mean and deviatoric stress, axisymmetric condition, plain strain 
condition, Shear strength of soils, drained and undrained shear tests, stress anisotropy, pore water pressure 
parameters, Critical state soil mechanics, failure surface, normally consolidated and over consolidated soils 
behavior, critical state boundary, elements of critical state model, failure stresses from critical state 
 
Module 3 [Lectures: 12] 
Shallow foundations, allowable loads and settlements, bearing capacity formulations, bearing capacity from 
field load tests, settlement calculations, Pile foundations, load capacity, pile group capacity, load transfer 
mechanism, lateral load capacity of pile foundations, Earth-retaining structures, modes of failure of earth 
retaining structures, stability of rigid and flexible retaining walls, mechanically stabilized earth walls, Slope 
stability, slope failure types, two-dimensional slope stability analysis 
 
Module 4 [Lectures: 6] 
Structural health monitoring of geotechnical structures – shallow and deep foundations, retaining walls, 
tunnels, underground stations, dams and embankments, interpretation of results, mitigation and 
requalification strategies 
 
Module 5 [Lectures: 6] 
Introduction to numerical and analytical modeling in Geomechanics: development of macros in excel, basic 
MATLAB programs and demo of geotechnical software-PLAXIS 2D and 3D, FLAC 2D and 3D, OASys, 
GeoSlope, L-Pile, P-disp/X-disp. 
 
Text Books 
1. Budhu. M (2012). Soil Mechanics and Foundations (3rd Ed). John Wiley and Sons. ISBN: 978-0-470-55684-

9. 
2. Das B.M. (2013). Advanced Soil Mechanics (4th Ed). CRC Press. ISBN-10: 9780415506656 
3. Knappett J.A. and Craig R.F. (2012). Craig’s Soil Mechanics (8th Ed). CRC Press. ISBN-10: 9780415561266. 
 
Online material 
Soil Mechanics course in NPTEL.  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/103/105103097/ 
 

 
 

73 
 



Title Air Pollution and Control Number CI7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech [CIE], M Tech[CIE] Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To gain understanding of the basic concept of air pollution, its sources and effects on human health and 

climate.  
2. To introduce concepts of aerosol dynamics used in ambient sampling, designing measurement 

technologies and air quality modelling.  
3. To develop understanding of the concepts and strategies for control of particulate matter and gas-phase 

pollutants.  
4. To provide knowledge of the current state of the atmosphere and introduce fundamentals of pollutant 

transport and dispersion, and modelling. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. The students are expected to achieve proficiency in: 
2. Developing a broad overview of local-to-global scale pollution issues and their specific impact on human 

health and environment.  
3. Solving problems related to dispersion and air quality modelling  
4. Understanding the source level air pollution issues and identifying the right control techniques/measures 

to meet the desired standard levels.  
5. Computing the performance of various unit operations and processes used in the air treatment. 
 
Contents 
Module I: Introduction to air pollution [Lectures 6] 
Historical events [Meuse River Valley 1930, Donora Pennsylvania 1948, London Smog 1952, Bhopal Gas 
Tragedy 1984, and related Concepts], Scales of air pollution, Sources and classification [CAPs and HAPs] of 
air pollutants, Air quality and standards, Emission Inventory, The Earth’s atmosphere: Structure and 
Composition, and energy balance.  
 
Module II: Aerosol Physics [Lectures 10]   
Fundamentals: Source, Size and Size distribution, Gas and Particle motion: Brownian motion, Diffusion, 
Inertia, External force field, Aerosol dynamics: coagulation, condensation, nucleation, particle measurements 
and Sampling techniques  
 
Module III: Emissions Control devices [Lectures 8] 
Removal of particles from gas stream: Settling chambers, Cyclone separators, electrostatic precipitation, 
filtration, wet collectors, collection efficiency; Removal of gases from effluents stream: Absorption by liquids, 
adsorption on solids, Examples: SO2 and NOx removal.  
 
Module IV: Meteorology [Lectures 6]  
Atmospheric meteorology, Wind velocity profile and Wind rose, turbulence, inversion layer and mixing 
depth and Atmospheric Stability. 
 
Module V: Dispersion of air pollutants and Air Quality modelling [Lecture 6] 
Dispersion models, Gaussian dispersion model: assumptions, dispersion parameters and effective stack 
height, plume rise and plume behavior, Receptor models, Introduction to Dispersion and receptor modelling 
software.  
 
Module VI: Effects of Air Pollution on Climate and Human health [Lectures 4]  
Tropospheric Ozone chemistry, Photochemical Smog, Acid Rain, Visibility, Indoor Air Pollution, Dose 
Response and Health effects. 
 
Text Books 
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics- From Air Pollution to Climate Change, J. H. Seinfeld and S. N. Pandis, 
John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Third Edition, 2013.  

74 
 



Aerosol Technology-Properties, Behavior and Measurement of Airborne Particles, W. C. Hinds, John Wiley 
and Sons, Inc., Second Edition, 1998.  
Introduction to Air Pollution Science, R. F. Phalen and R. N. Phalen, Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC, 
Burlington, MA, 2013.  
Aerosol Measurement: Principles, Techniques and Applications, edited by K. Willeke, P. Baron, Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, 1993. 
 
Online Course Material 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105104099/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

75 
 



Title Industrial Waste: Control and Utilization Number MT7LXX0 
 

Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B Tech [CIE], M.Tech [CIE] Type Program Elective 
(PE) 

Prerequisite  

Objective 
Classification of waste products and technological management for their environmental sustainability 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Differentiate among the different kinds of waste. 
2. Find optimum method for waste management. 
 
Content 
Types of waste: Solid, Liquid and gaseous (4 lectures) 
Sources of waste: Industrial: Metallurgical, Pharma & Chemical, Electronic, Biological (8 lectures) 
Recycling of waste: Metal Scrap remelting, Extraction of precious and harmful metals from 
electronic  waste, (8 lectures) 
Waste to wealth: Waste for energy, Production of commercial nanoparticles from waste (8 lectures) 
Treatment Storage and Disposal of waste:  Long term storage Land filling, incineration; Short term storage 
and container materials (8 lectures) 
Case Studies: Nuclear industry, Biomedical industry, Steel industry (6 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
Pichtel, J.,Waste Management Practices: Municipal, Hazardous, and Industrial, 2nd edition,  CRC Press, 2014. 
Choudhary, C. K., Waste management and bioremediation, Oxford Book Company, 2012. 
 
Self-Learning materials 
Wong, J. W. C, Surampalli, R. Y., Zhang, T. C., Tyagi, R. D., Selvan, A.,Sustainable Solid Waste Management,  
American Society of Civil Engineers (2016). 
Ojovan, M. I., Handbook of Advanced Radioactive Waste Conditioning Technologies, Woodhead Publishing 
(2011). 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Dubey, B. K., Electronic Waste Management - Issues and Challenges, Division of Environmental 

Engineering and Management at Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, NPTEL, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_ce07/preview 

2. Dubey, B. K., Integrated Waste Management for a Smart City, Division of Environmental Engineering and 
Management at Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, NPTEL, 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_ce20/preview 

3. Ramachandra, T. V., Municipal Solid Waste Management, Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute 
of Science, NPTEL, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/120108005/2# 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

76 
 



Title Surveillance and Security of Infrastructures Number CI7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech, M.Tech [CIE] Type Program Elective 
(PE) 

Prerequisite  

Objective 
The course will help students to understand the types and methods of surveillance of building, transport and 
other critical infrastructures and will introduce several security measures for these infrastructures. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
At the end of the course, the student should be able to: 
1. Describe the types of surveillance and components of security system for an infrastructure 
2. Recognize critical infrastructures and perform risk analysis and vulnerability assessment. 
3. Develop surveillance detection plan for a building and can analyse building security 
4. Understand the needs and methods of surveillance and security for transportation 
 
Content 
MODULE I: [No. of lectures-10] 
Introduction to surveillance: Surveillance – definition, needs, and role; types and methods of surveillance, 
components of security system, security of infrastructure-civil structures, network communications, 
electricity grid. Attack methodology/Attack cycle/Pre-incident indicators, Surveillance detection 
 
MODULE II: [No. of lectures-12] 
Critical infrastructures: Introduction, risk analysis and vulnerability assessment, Representation as a complex 
system, modelling and simulation, graphical formalisms, monitoring and surveillance 
technologies.Vulnerability analysis, Potential threats to critical infrastructures and key resources (CI/KR), 
Red Zone analysis 
 
MODULE III: [No. of lectures – 12] 
Building security and control system: Mechanical and electrical installation security, fire protection and 
escape, monitoring burglary and assault, emergency communication, mobility and access 
management,communication networks of security systems- Energy Management Systems (EMS), Building 
Automation Systems (BAS), Building Management Systems (BMS), Hostile operations 
 
MODULE IV: [No. of lectures -8] 
Types of Attacks: Surveillance and security of transport infrastructure: In-vehicle, at station, running-way, 
and facility surveillance; technology, data, and resources; advantages and cautions, risk assessment methods 
and tools, ITS security areas and multi-modal transportation security. Information and Communication 
Technologies(ICT)-based system and security in ITS, Security and performance measures, Type of attacks 
 
Text Books 
1. Petersen, J. K. Introduction to surveillance studies, CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group 
2. Yan, Q. W. Introduction to intelligent surveillance, Springer, New Zealand 
3. Flammini, F, Critical Infrastructure Security: Assessment, Prevention, Detection, Response. WIT Press, 

Southampton, UK 
4. Wang, S. Intelligent buildings and building automaton. Routledge Publication 
5. Fries, R. and Chowdhury, M. and Brummond, J. Transportation infrastructure security utilizing 

intelligent transportation systems. John Wiley and Sons. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

77 
 



Title Digital Twin and Asset Management Number CI4XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech [CIE] Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
This course aims to introduce the cyber-physical system and computational aspect of digital twin models and 
their application in various infrastructure related issues in civil engineering. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Graduate of this course will be familiar with 
2. Application of cloud and edge computing, and machine learning of DT. 
3. Cyber-physical system and application of IoT in DT 
4. Elements of 3D reconstruction and use of AR & VR 
5. Standards and frameworks related to DT model building and use. 
6. Applications of DT in construction, building management, smart city, transport, and water management 
 
Content 
Module I: Introduction (1 lectures) 
Relationships among digital twins in systems: hierarchical, associational, and peer-to-peer. 
 
Module II: Building Digital Twin (14 lectures) 
Fundamentals – Modeling and Simulation Techniques; 3D modeling techniques; Machine Learning for 
Modeling of Systems. Simulation using real time data from IOT devices. Cloud based software model. 
Sensors: IoT Devices; APIs; Connectivity; Deployment; Security; Interoperability 
Representation: (a) Micro - 3D reconstruction: photogrammetry and structure from motion (b) Macro 3D 
reconstruction: 3D GIS and spatial modelling; Application of AR and VR; Real-time data visualization 
Decision making: Information modelling and management; Decision support tools; Rule-based automation; 
Optimization. 
Illustration using example of the Digital Twin of a Smart Building 
 
Module III: Standards (5 lectures) 
Digital Twin Standards and Frameworks: Data security; Data collection ethics and principles.  
 
Module IV: Building and Construction (10) 
Construction Management: 3D model of Buildings; Automated Progress Monitoring; As-Built Vs As-
Designed Models; Monitoring and Tracking of Workers. 
Buildings: Data acquisition: Real-time sensors, Asset management System, Building management system, 
Space management system; Data/Model integration: Building information modelling; Intelligent 
environment control & energy simulation, Intelligent space & asset management function, Intelligent 
operation & maintenance managing function.  
Smart City: Fixed and moving sensors; Spatial data to 3D/4D models; City Information Model (GIS, BIM, 
IoT); Underground infrastructure model; Modelling and forecast; Intelligent response; AR Models of 
infrastructure.  
 
Module V: Other Infrastructure (12) 
Energy Asset: 3D models of offshore platforms: wind and hydrocarbon; Sensors for environmental load 
detection; Digital power plant; Safety and Maintenance planning 
Transport: Real-time traffic data; Spatio-temporal demand modelling of fuel stations and EV charging points; 
Highway and bridge health monitoring; crowd simulation and management. 
Water: Hydraulic models; System-level models; hydrological assessment; Smart network; Water quality and 
supply system monitoring. 
 
Text Books 

1. R. Szeliski (2011) Ch. 12 3D reconstruction, In Book:  Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications, 
Texts in Computer Science, 303 DOI 10.1007/978-1-84882-935-0_7, Springer-Verlag London Limited. 

2. R. Szeliski (2011) Ch. 7 Structure from motion, In Book:  Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications, 
Texts in Computer Science, 303 DOI 10.1007/978-1-84882-935-0_7, Springer-Verlag London Limited. 

78 
 



3. T. Luhmann, S. Robson, S Kyle, J Boehm (2014) Close-Range Photogrammetry and 3D Imaging (2nd ed). 
De Gruter. ISBN 978-3-11-030269-1. 

4. B. Cyganek (2013) Object Detection and Recognition: Theory and Practice. Wiley. ISBN: 978-0-470-97637-
1. 

5. M. Farsi, A. Daneshkhah, A Hosseinian-Far, H. Jahankhani. (2020) Digital Twin Technologies And Smart 
Cities. Springer. ISBN 978-3-030-18732-3. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

79 
 



Title Cyber-Physical Systems for Number CI4XX0 
Infrastructure 

Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech [CIE] Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
This course aims at : 
1. Introducing the significance of cyber-physical systems (CPS) in civil and infrastructure engineering. 
2. Understanding the basic aspects of instrumentation and wireless communications.  
3. Applying the cyber-physical system principles to civil engineering applications 
 
 Learning Outcomes 
At the end of the course, students will be able to 
1. Realize the need of CPS, sensors and instrumentation in civil engineering 
2. Utilize the concepts of wireless communications in major infrastructure planning 
3. Adopt various structural control systems 
4. Find innovative CPS based solutions for various civil engineering applications 
 
Contents 
Module 1 [Lectures: 8] 
Introduction to cyber-physical systems (CPS), significance of CPS in civil engineering, sensors and 
instrumentation-accelerometers, strain gauges, LVDTs, pressure cells, load cells and other sensors, sensor 
interfacing with an arduino or raspberry pi based board 
 
Module 2 [Lectures: 10] 
Wireless communications and networks, communication principles, fiber optic sensing, time domain 
reflectometry, microelectromechanical systems, particle image velocimetry, acoustic emission, wireless 
sensor network, distributed temperature sensing 
 
Module 3 [Lectures: 12] 
Structural control systems-passive- hysteretic seismic isolation bearings, energy dissipation dampers and 
absorbers and others; active-active base isolation, active mass driver and active bracing, semi-active- tuned 
mass dampers and other dampers; and hybrid-hybrid mass damper, hybrid base isolation and hybrid 
damper-actuator bracing control  
 
Module 4 [Lectures: 12] 
Applications in civil and infrastructure engineering-structural health monitoring of infrastructure systems, 
subsurface profiling and stability analysis of geotechnical and geophysical systems, hydrological 
applications, transportation engineering applications, environmental and GIS applications 
 
Text Books 
1. Rajeev A. (2015). Principles of Cyber-Physical Systems. The MIT Press. ISBN: 978-0-262-02911-7 
2. Lee, E. A., & Seshia, S. A. (2017). Introduction to embedded systems: A cyber-physical systems approach. 

(2nd Edn). The MIT Press. ISBN-10: 0262533812 
 
Suggested articles 

1. Legatiuk, D., Dragos, K., & Smarsly, K. (2017). Modeling and evaluation of cyber‐physical systems in 
civil engineering. PAMM, 17(1), 807-808. 

2. Soga, K., & Schooling, J. (2016). Infrastructure sensing. Interface focus, 6(4), 20160023. 
3. Saaed, T. E., Nikolakopoulos, G., Jonasson, J. E., & Hedlund, H. (2015). A state-of-the-art review of 

structural control systems. Journal of Vibration and Control, 21(5), 919-937. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

80 
 



Title AI/ML in Infrastructure  Number CI7XX0 
Engineering 

Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech ,M. Tech [CIE] Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite Mathematics I; Mathematics II   
Objectives 
This course aims at: 
1. Comprehensive understanding of the problem settings and application of machine learning in civil and 

infrastructure engineering. 
2. Development of programming skills to execute machine learning algorithms in civil and infrastructure 

engineering. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to: 
1. Analyze problems in deterministic and random environments. 
2. Solve challenging problems in engineering such as prediction, uncertainty quantification, damage 

assessment etc. using machine learning methods. 
 
Content 
Module 1 Introduction(Lectures: 8) 
Review of AI/ML: Fundamentals concepts and working principle of ANN; network training; models; 
supervised and unsupervised learning networks; feed-forward backpropagation networks; generalized 
regression networks; radial basis function networks; Gaussian processes. 
Support Vector Machine and Support Vector Regression;Spatial and Temporal Data Analysis 
 
Module 2  Deep Learning (Lectures:14)  
Overview of  Deep Networks; Building Deep Networks for Classification: Stacked Autoencoders, Linear 
Decoders with Autoencoders, Linear Decoder, Feature extraction using convolution, CNN, Pooling, 
Classification layer; Training CNN, Restricted Boltzmann Machines, Deep Belief Networks, Introduction to 
GAN, Introduction to Recurrent Networks and LSTM 
 
 
Module 3 (Lectures: 10) 
Applications in Civil and Infrastructure Engineering: Scope of applications in structural engineering, water 
resource engineering, geotechnical engineering, transportation engineering, construction engineering, 
environmental engineering, coastal and marine engineering etc.; examples for application of AI/ML in 
material modelling, traffic management and safety, foundation settlement. 
 
Module 4 (Lectures: 10) 
Other applications: Examples for application of AI/ML in structural control system identification, structural 
health monitoring, damage assessment, surrogate modelling, uncertainty quantification etc. 
 
Text Books 
1. J.-A. Goulet (2020) Probabilistic Machine Learning for Civil Engineers, The MITPress. 
2. P.C. Deka (2020) A Primer on Machine Learning Applications in Civil Engineering, CRC Press. ISBN 

9781138323391. 
C.M. Bishop (2006) Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer. ISBN 9780387310732. 
S. Shalev-Shwartz, S. Ben-David (2014) Understanding Machine Learning From Theory to Algorithms, 
Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781107057135. 
Deep Learning, Goodfellow et al., MIT Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

81 
 



Title Mathematical Modelling in Number CI7XX0 
Environmental Systems 

Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech [CIE] Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
To provide comprehensive understanding on scope and application of mathematical modelling to 
understand environmental processes and solve related problems. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Understanding basic principles of mathematical modelling used in solving complex environmental issues. 
 
Content 
Module 1: Environmental process and systems [Lectures 8] 
Natural and Engineered Systems, Mass Balance, Reaction Kinetics, Phase equilibrium, Steady State, Response 
time, Micro and Macro Transport Processes 
 
Module 2: Modelling of reactors [Lectures 10] 
Homogeneous and heterogeneous reactors; Mixed batch reactors; sequencing batch reactor, mixed flow 
reactors, plug flow reactors  
 
Module 3: Surface environment systems and Water Quality Modelling [Lectures 14] 
Fundamental of modelling aquatic systems; Lakes, Rivers river and estuaries and lake hydrodynamics; 
Stratification and eutrophication; Dissolved oxygen model for streams; Temperature models. 
 
Module 4: Air quality modeling[Lectures 10] 
Introduction to air quality models; Meteorology; Atmospheric stability and turbulence; Gaussian plume 
model and modifications, Dispersion models, Receptor models, Acid Rain Modelling, Introduction to 
Dispersion and receptor modelling software. 
 
Text Books 
1. Weber, W.J. Jr., Process Dynamics in Environmental Systems, John Wiley &amp; Sons Inc. (1996). 
2. Thomann, R.V., and Muller, J.A., Principles of Surface Water Quality Modelling and Control, Harper 

International Edition, N.D. (1987). 
3. Steven C.Chapra, Surface Water Quality Modelling, The McGraw-Hill Companies,Inc., New York (2009). 
4. Deaton and Wine Brake, “Dynamic Modelling of Environmental Systems”, Wiley & sons (2002). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

82 
 



Title Intelligent Buildings Number CI7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech [CIE] Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
Provide knowledge of advanced intelligent building technologies, system configuration and standards, 
system operation and control. 
To provide basic understanding on the use of system integration, application of technologies and the 
operation performances. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. To understand the design and requirements for building automation systems and intelligent building 

systems 
2. Assess the impacts of using different architectures, LAN protocols/standards and Internet technologies 

in BAS design. 
3. Able to integrate and configure building environmental control, lighting control,security and safety 

control systems. 
 
Content 
Module 1: Intelligent Buildings [Lectures 4] 
Introduction: Concepts, Definitions, Intelligent architecture and structure, evolution of intelligent buildings, 
IB assessment criteria  
 
Module 2: Building Automation System (BAS) and BAS communication standards [Lectures 12] 
Digital controller, I/P and O/P units, sensors and actuators, architecture and configuration of BAS,BAS 
outstation and central station, Programming and monitoring platforms and environment, building energy 
management functions; BAS communication standards(BACnet, LonWorks, Modbus, PROFIBUS, EIB) and 
their features, compatibility of different protocol standards, integration at management level  
 
Module 3: Local Area Network (LAN) and Applications of Internet technologies in BAS [Lectures 10] 
Local Area Network (LAN), protocol standards and OSI model, medium-access schemes, LAN standards, 
Ethernet, ARCnet, LonTalk, wireless technologies, ZigBee, applications of wireless technologies in BAS; 
Applications of Internet Technologies: Internet and Internet protocols, TCP/IP, Internet LAN vs WAN, use 
of Internet technologies at different levels,BACnet/IP, convergence networks and total integration  
 
Module 4: Light Control, and Security and safety control Systems [Lectures 12] 
Light Control Systems: Component, analogue and digital control, DXM512-A, digital addressable lighting 
interface(DALI), systems based on common automation protocols, energy management and lighting control 
strategies; Security and safety control Systems: CCTV systems, analogue systems and IP-surveillance 
systems; Access control system, different types of access control, intelligent readers and system topologies; 
Burglar alarm system, functions of burglar alarm systems; Fire alarm systems, typical fire detectors, 
conventional fire panels, addressable fire panels. 
 
Module 5: Smart and optimal control[Lectures 6] 
Feed forward control, feedback control and adaptive control;process control and optimal control; different 
optimal control methods (rule-based control,performance-based optimal control and model-based optimal 
control. 
 
Text Books 
1. Wang, S.W. (2010) Intelligent Buildings and Building Automation, Spon Press (Taylor & Francis), London. 
2. Atkin, B. (1988) Intelligent Building, John Wiley &Sons. 
3. Leszek R. (1987) Introduction to Local Area Networks with Microcomputer Experiments, Prentice-Hall 

Inc. 
4. Levermore, G.J. (1992) Building Energy Management Systems, E&FN Spon. 
 
 
 

83 
 



Title Building Services Number CI7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech [CIE] Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
To provide knowledge of the operating principles and issues of different building services systems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
To develop understanding on selection criteria of suitable building services for specific requirements. 
To understand critical issues related with operation and maintenance building services systems in modern 
complex buildings. 
 
Content 
Module 1: Introduction to Building Services[Lectures 4] 
Objectives of Building services, Classification bodybuilding services, Selection of services and Application to 
different types of buildings;Building as a whole, Energy, heat transfer and thermal comfort, Natural and 
Artificial Lighting; Ventilation and its types; Condensation in Buildings  
 
Module 2: Piped Services[Lectures 14] 
Introduction, Hot and Cold water: Direct and Indirect system, protectionist, valves, water storage, Pipe size 
and resistance, hydraulics and fluid flow,circulation; Sanitary fittings, discharge and waste systems; Fire 
prevention and control:Fire Fighting equipment, Methods of fighting fire, Combustibility of materials, 
Structural elements and fire resistance, Fire escape routes, ventilation and control; Gas and storage:Control 
and safety features, Purging, Flue gas analysis, Gas consumption and pipe sizing,Ventilation requirement; 
Solid waste disposal: Collection and removal, onsite-processing and disposal methods, Guidelines for Solid 
waste and Electronic waste management,Disposal practices: landfill, Vermi-compost, Incineration, pyrolysis; 
Drainage: Surface-water drainage and Below-ground treatment  
 
Module 3: Mechanical services[Lectures 6] 
Introduction, Lifts, elevators and escalators, dumbwaiters,conveyors, air conditioning, and their types  
 
Module 4: Space Heating and Cooling[Lectures 6] 
Types of heating: Open fires, stoves, boilers, radiators;Flow and Ceiling Heating, Warm air systems and air 
conditioning, Geothermal and heat pumps, solar energy  
 
Module 5: Electrical Installations and Acoustics[Lectures 12] 
Electricity generation, supply and distribution,Circuit design, Cable capacity and voltage drop, Overloads 
and Safety cut-outs. Testing,Telecommunications installations; Acoustic principles, Sound and Pressure 
levels, pressure levels in different zones, Sound transmission, Noise rating  
 
Text Books 
1. Chadderton D. V. (2007) Building Services Engineering, Fifth Edition, Taylor & Francis, London and New 

York. 
2. Hall, F. ; Greeno, R. (2007) Building Services, Fourth Edition, Butterworth-Heinemann, Elsevier.  
3. Harrison, H. W. &amp; Trotman, P. M. (2000) Building Services: Performance, Diagnosis, Maintenance, 

Repair and Avoidance of defects, London: CRC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

84 
 



Title Environmental Biotechnology and Bioremediation Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for B. Tech, M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Program 

Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
Acquaint students with the way wastes/waste waters as well as toxic wastes are treated. 
Teach methods pertaining to sustainable waste water recycling 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Acquaint students with the way wastes/wastewaters as well as toxic wastes are treated. 
2. Teach methods pertaining to sustainable wastewater recycling 
 
Content 
Introduction: Basics of Microbiology, Stoichiometry and Bacterial energetics [Lectures 5]. 
Kinetics and Reactors: Microbial Kinetics and Biofilm kinetics, Reactor types, Mass balances [Lectures 7].  
The activated sludge process: Characteristics of activated sludge, Process configurations, Design and 
operating criteria, aeration systems and sludge separation [Lectures 5].  
Nitrification and denitrification: Bacterial physiology and basic process including biofilm and hybrid 
[Lectures 4].  
Phosphorus removal: Normal phosphorus uptake into biomass, precipitation and enhanced biological 
removal [Lectures 4].  
Drinking water treatment: Aerobic biofilm processes to remove biological instability, biodegradation and 
denitrification [Lectures 4].  
Anaerobic treatment by methanogenesis: Reactor configurations, Process chemistry and Microbiology, 
Process kinetics [Lectures 4]. 
Detoxification of hazardous chemicals: Molecular recalcitrance, Biodegradation of problem environmental 
contaminants [Lectures 4].  
Bioremediation: Scope and characteristics of contaminants, Biodegradability, Treatability studies, 
Engineering strategies for bioremediation, Biotechnological and genetics engineering approaches-creations 
of superbugs [Lectures 4].  
 
Laboratory  
Determining empirical formula for wastewater based on elemental analysis, Determining COD degradation 
rate using different electron acceptors, Determining the microbial growth rate in wastewater under 
oxic/anoxic conditions, Determining the % COD removal using batch & continuous process for simulated 
wastewater, Determining the effect of initial microbial load on COD removal rate, Determining the effect of 
C/N ratio on COD removal rate, determine the sludge bulking/good settling sludge, Performing biological 
nitrification, Biological denitrification, Biofilm process for water treatment, Setting up bio electrochemical 
system for simultaneous C, N removal, Acclimatizing microbial consortia for treatment of hazardous waste, 
Setting up an in situ bioremediation system 
 
Text Books 
Environmental Biotechnology: Principles and Applications, Rittmann, B.E., McCarty, P.L., Tata McGraw 
Hill, 2001.  
 
Reference Books  
Bioprocess Engineering: Basic Concepts, Shuler, M., Kargi, F., Second Edition Prentice Hall, 2002.  
General Microbiology, Stanier, R. Y., W.H. Freeman and Co, 2009.  
 
Online course material  
Gargi Singh, Applied Environmental Microbiology, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Civil 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/105107173/ 
 
 
 
 

85 
 



Title Environmental Hydrology Number CI7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for B. Tech, M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To provide qualitative understanding of hydrologic processes.  
2. To inculcate basic steps of quantifying hydrologic parameters.  
3. To enable design structures for water and soil management. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in:  
1. Enable to develop and design flood management solutions, wetlands and landscapes. 
2. Ability to design hydraulic structures and processes  
3. Able to predict and assess the impact of precipitation, and effectively use water for different services 

such as in agriculture 
 
Content 
Hydrological cycle, climate and society: Water food industry nexus, transport from precipitation to 
groundwater, modelling hydrologic cycles and basic hydrologic data [Lectures 5].  
Precipitation: Forms of precipitation, its causes, measurement of precipitation, data of precipitation, 
precipitation trends and frequencies, depth-duration-frequency of precipitation, Probability of precipitation 
occurrence [Lectures 7].  
Infiltration and soil Moisture Management: Soil properties, soil-water balance, infiltration and its estimation, 
evaporation and its estimation, evapo-transpiration (ET) and its measurement and estimation, Crop 
referenced ET [Lectures 7].  
Runoff: Why Runoff, Factor affecting Runoff and flow models, watershed, Hydrograph and its components, 
peak runoff and stormwater runoff, flood and its estimation, catchment character, agricultural and sub-
surface drainage [Lectures 5].  
Streams : Streams, Temporal and spatial streams, Stream Biota and Order, Measurement of stage and 
Velocity, stream stability and sediment transport, Meander migration, Flood plains, Stream Classification- 
Mountain Stream and Rosen stream methods, Channel evolution, Losing and gaining streams Unit 
hydrograph, flood frequency, Gumbel and Type III distribution studies [Lectures 8].  
Floods and Hydraulic Control Structures: open channel flows, Darcy Weisbach and Manning equations, 
weirs, flumes, conduits, culverts, riffles, pools and runs [Lectures 5].  
Hydrology of Wetlands and in Ground Water: Detention and Retention ponds, Agricultural impacts and 
Brackish systems, Filter Strips, Riparian Buffers and Ditches. Leachate impact, subsurface water, aquifers, 
wells, recharge, ground water mapping [Lectures 5]. 
Experimental Outline- Modelling  
Use the local historical precipitation data of Jodhpur and find the probability distribution function, which 
can effectively predict it.  
Use the local precipitation data as an input to derive synthetic mass curves. Further, utilize the data to 
calculate runoff and land use. Use HydroCAD v.9.0.  
Model a drainage management scenario of a porous tile of 10 cm diameter running at the boundary between 
1ft loamy soil from the atmosphere and 1ft sandy soil below the porous tile. The ponding is 1ft height in an 
area of 1 acre. Use Ansys Fluent and MicroFEM, and compare the results.  
Create a new numerical groundwater flow model with MODFLOW-2005 / MODFLOW-NWT, having a 
confined aquifer at 80 m depth from soil surface. Import the data (shapefiles, images, spreadsheets) from 
crop.xls; Use uniform percolation of 1ft per acre as inflow, which can be manual input data to MODFLOW; 
link packages with their parameters; run a simulation; visualize and export the results.  
Use Hydrus 2D to simulate the water potential about the 25 cm larger and 15 cm smaller external diameter 
of a porous frustum of 0.25 cm thickness leaching out saline solution of 2000 ppm (brackish irrigation water) 
and train the model using a Python program to handle different concentrations of salinity. Input training 
data from the field experiments collected after soil analysis at Site C, IIT Jodhpur.  
Using the results of water potential from Experiment 5 and estimate net infiltration below the root zone if 
the crop is Okra. Use Crop ET reference values from Frangmeier et al. 2015. Use INFIL 3.0 for the 
simulations.  

86 
 



Derive approximate flow effectiveness of a trapezoidal notch of 2.5 m base and 4.5 m surface with a height 
of 1m using OpenFlow Flow Master and compare the results with Channel Design and Channel Studio.  
Use EPANET to evaluate water distribution of a community of 200 households with an average 
consumption of 300 litres of water per day living at a height of 20 m from ground level. These 200 households 
are supplied water from a 50 m high tank using a given distribution plan. Refer lecture notes for the 
approximate length of 200 m. Find the energy expense for distributing the water if the water tank is having 
15 m diameter and 10 m height. 
 
Text Books 
1. Environmental Hydrology, Andy D. Ward, Stanley W. Trimble, Suzette R. Burckhard, John G. Lyon, 

CRC Press, Third Edition, ISBN-13: 978-1466589414, ISBN-10: 1466589418, 2016.  
2. Engineering Hydrology K Subramanya, Fourth Edition, McGraw Hill Education (India), Pvt, Ltd., New 

Delhi ISBN 1-25-902997-2, 978-1-25902997-4, 2013. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

87 
 



Title Introduction to Structural Health Number CI4XX0 
Monitoring 

Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. [CIE] Type PE 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
This course aims at: 
1. Fundamental understanding of the monitoring systems for estimating structural health. 
2. Development of time and frequency domain methods to estimate damage in the structures. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 Students will have the ability to: 
1. Assess the damage in the existing structures and their components using time and modal based methods. 
2. Design the layout of the sensors and hardware for acquiring the experimental data from the structure. 
 
Contents 
Module 1 
Review of structural dynamics: Development of equation of motion for multi degree of freedom system; 
solution methods; response in free and forced vibration; types of damping; computation of vibration 
properties, natural time period and modes. (Lectures: 9) 
Module 2 
Concept of structural health monitoring (SHM): Introduction to damage; passive and active SHM; non-
destructive evaluation (NDE) and SHM; structural health management. (Lectures: 4) 
Vibration-based techniques for SHM: Basic concepts; data evaluation and assessment; structural damage 
assessment – diagnostic levels and methods; modelling of damaged structural elements; modal assurance 
criterion (MAC); damage localization and quantification. (Lectures: 8) 
Module 3 
Frequency domain decomposition (FDD); time-domain damage detection methods - Kalman filters, 
autoregressive (AR) and autoregressive with exogenous input (ARX) models. (Lectures: 9) 
Module 4 
Miscellaneous topics: ANN and statistical pattern recognition approach to SHM; predictive health 
monitoring; Bayesian model updating; introduction to piezo-electric materials; electro-mechanical 
impedance (EMI) technique; fundamentals of restoration and rehabilitation. (Lectures: 8) 
SHM system design: Data handling - data acquisition systems and transmission; processing of recorded 
data; evaluate sources of variability; fibre-optics sensors and smart sensing; sensor optimization, placement 
and layout design. (Lectures: 4) 
Text Books 
1. D. Balageas, C.-P. Fritzen, A. Güemes (2006) Structural Health Monitoring, ISTE Ltd. ISBN 

9781905209019. 
2. C.R. Farrar, K. Worden (2012) Structural Health Monitoring: A Machine Learning Perspective, Wiley. 

ISBN 9781119994336. 
3. H.-P. Chen (2018) Structural Health Monitoring of Large Civil Engineering Structures, Wiley Blackwell. 

ISBN 9781119166627.  
4. C.-K. Soh, Y. Yang, S. Bhalla (2014) Smart Materials in Structural Health Monitoring, Control and 

Biomechanics, Springer. ISBN 9783642244629. 
 
Additional reference 
Structural Health Monitoring (2018) by Prof. Srinivasan Chandrasekaran on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/114/106/114106046/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

88 
 



Title Infrastructure Planning and Management   Number CI4XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech [CIE] Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
This course aims at: 
1. Introducing basic principles and concepts of infrastructure planning and management. 
2. Realizing the real-world risks and challenges in managing infrastructure. 
3. Introducing the infrastructure planning process as well as the state of infrastructure across sectors in India.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to 
1. Analyze systematically the various risks that plague infrastructure projects.  
2. Develop critical thinking on a variety of novel solutions or fixes which aids in execution infrastructure 

projects better. 
3. Device methods to analyze the infrastructure projects based on various risks. 
4. Apply the design methodologies to the real world case studies.  
5. Design innovative methods for long lasting infrastructure and understand the successful project delivery 

strategies. 
 
Contents 
Module 1 [Lectures: 6] 
Introduction, infrastructure scenario in India, transportation, power and telecom sectors, urban and rural 
infrastructure in India, road infrastructure development in India, rural roads development in India-
opportunities and challenges 
 
Module 2 [Lectures: 8]  
Infrastructure economics and finance, project structuring and risk allocation in project finance, Public-Private 
Partnership (PPP) for infrastructure- case studies, risk management in infrastructure projects, term sheet 
development, economic and social environmental risk in infrastructure. 
 
Module 3 [Lectures: 8] 
Project Governance, public sector governance, strategies for governing against infrastructure project 
turbulence, the governance model, data–base management, actor mapping and social network analysis, fair 
process and negotiations, design thinking, life cycle and benefit cost analysis, pavement preservation and 
road asset management system. 
 
Module 4 [Lectures: 10] 
Maintenance of infrastructure, case studies of infrastructure, privatization in infrastructure projects, road 
information system for maintenance management of road infrastructure projects, flexibilities and options on 
projects, module flexibilities in projects, tourism infrastructure projects- implementation on PPP Format. 
 
Module 5 [Lectures: 10] 
Innovative infrastructure financing, urban infrastructure needs in India and funding options, new and 
innovative materials for long lasting road infrastructure, green highways –recycling technology, durable road 
infrastructure –options and recent developments, polycentric governance and incomplete design, successful 
project delivery strategies.   
 
Text Books 
1. Goodman AS, Hastak M (2006). Infrastructure planning handbook: planning, engineering, and economics. 

New York: ASCE Press. 
2. Miller R, Lessard DR (2001). The strategic management of large engineering projects: Shaping institutions, 

risks, and governance. MIT press. 
 
Additional reference 
Infrastructure Planning and Management (2018) by Prof. Ashwin Mahalingam NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/106/105106188/  

89 
 



Title Introduction to Power Infrastructure Number CI4XX0 
Engineering 

Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech [CIE] Type Program Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
This course aims at: 
1.   An overview of the key renewable energy infrastructure technologies in wind, hydroelectric, tidal 

and solar. 
2.   Introduction of fundamentals of piping, transmission and distribution systems in the power 

infrastructure. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to: 
1. Conceptualize and use the knowledge on different civil engineering components for executing 

renewable power infrastructure projects. 
2. Design and develop smart grid networks for transmission and distribution of the energy in rural and 

urban sectors. 
  
Contents 
Module 1 
Introduction to power infrastructure: Types of electrical generation; generation system architecture; 
power plant planning and design. (Lectures: 3) 
Hydroelectric infrastructure: Site selection; classification; hydrographs; storage and pondage; essential 
elements; selection of turbines. (Lectures: 6) 
 
Module 2 
Tidal energy infrastructure: Fundamentals of tide; wave theory, loading and energy; operating principle 
- oscillating device; turbine characteristics; devices; moorings and anchors; foundations. (Lectures: 6) 
Wind energy infrastructure: Offshore and onshore wind; properties of wind; wind resource assessment; 
wind turbine blades; wind turbines in grid; wind projects. (Lectures: 6) 
 
Module 3 
Solar energy infrastructure: Basics of solar PV, fundamentals of the design of solar energy fields; 
concentrated solar power plant; solar water heating systems. (Lectures: 6) 
Introduction to pipelines in power infrastructure:  Materials; pressure design of piping; fittings; layout 
and supports; flexibility and fatigue; vibration. (Lectures: 7) 
 
Module 4 
Smart grid, transmission and distribution: Grid resilience; environmental performance; operational 
efficiencies; network architecture; transmission systems; wide area monitoring, protection and control, 
transmission and distribution architecture; microgrids; vulnerability; peak load shifting and grid 
storage. (Lectures: 8) 
  
Reference Books/Reports 
1. L.F. Drbal, P.G. Boston, K.L. Westra, R.B. Erickson (1996) Power Plant Engineering, Kluwer Academic 

Publishers. ISBN 9781461380474. 
2. S. Borlase (2013) Smart Grid Infrastructure, Technology, and Solutions, CRC Press. ISBN 

9781439829103. 
3. G.A. Antaki (2005) Piping and Pipeline Engineering Design, Construction, Maintenance, Integrity, 

and Repair, Taylor & Francis. ISBN 0824709640. 
4. P. Jain (2011) Wind Energy Engineering, McGraw-Hill. ISBN 9780071714778. 
5. D. Greaves, G. Iglesias (2018) Wave and Tidal Energy, John Wiley & Sons Ltd. ISBN 9781119014454. 
6. S. A. Kalogirou (2009) Solar Energy Engineering Processes and Systems, Elsevier. ISBN 

9780123745019. 
 
 

90 
 



Title Thermal and Nuclear Power Infrastructure Number CI4XX0 
Engineering 

Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. [CIE] Type PE 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
This course aims at: 
1. An overview of the energy infrastructure technologies in thermal and nuclear systems. 
2. Introducing the waste generated from the above systems and its respective utilization in civil and 

infrastructure engineering. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have the ability to: 
1. Conceptualize and use the knowledge on different civil engineering components for executing power 

infrastructure projects. 
2. Design and develop cooling networks and chimneys for power plants. 
 
Contents 
Module 1 
Overview of power plant planning and design. (Lectures: 2) 
Thermal energy infrastructure: Plant configuration; emission reduction; repair; maintenance; cooling; 
reliability and risk assessment. (Lectures: 11) 
 
Module 2 
Chimney: Design of chimney; construction and maintenance. (Lectures: 5) 
Waste management and fly ash: Power plant waste – fly ash; chemical composition and classification; 
disposal and reuse; applications in cement, soil stabilization, pavement construction, geo polymers, bricks 
etc.; environmental issues and exposure concerns; flue gas desulfurization. (Lectures: 10) 
 
Module 3 
Nuclear energy infrastructure: Policy and regulations; economics and financing of nuclear power plants; 
nuclear technology selection and project implementation; fuel supply, radioactive waste and management; 
issues; facilities and basic infrastructure. (Lectures: 14) 
 
Reference Books/Reports 
1. L.F. Drbal, P.G. Boston, K.L. Westra, R.B. Erickson (1996) Power Plant Engineering, Kluwer Academic 

Publishers. ISBN 9781461380474. 
2. Basic Infrastructure for a Nuclear Power Project (2006) Technical Report, IAEA. ISBN 9201085060. 
3. G.F.M. de Souza (2012) Thermal Power Plant Performance Analysis, Springer. ISBN 9781447123088.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

91 
 



Title Infrastructure planning and design for Number CI4XX0 
rail and air transport 

Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech [CIE] Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
In this course the students will learn to plan and design the elements of rail and air  transportation system 
and will understand their operational principles. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
At the end of the course, the student should be able to: 
Understand various elements of rail and air transportation systems 
Forecast travel demand for these transportation systems 
Understand the layout, design, and operation of these transportation systems 
Conceptually design a transport system compatible with the surrounding land use 
Understand the mobility and accessibility of these systems. 
 
Content 
MODULE I: [No. of lectures – 12] 
Railway operational system, traffic forecast and surveys, components of railway track and rolling stock, 
railway alignment, geometric design elements, traction, safety measures, track laying, inspection and 
maintenance, track drainage, bridge maintenance, classification of renewal works, track renewal trains.  
 
MODULE II: No. Of lectures - 8 
Signaling and interlocking – objectives and classification, Site selection and facilities for railway stations 
and yards, High Speed Railways- Modernization of railways, effect of high-speed track, vehicle 
performance on track, high speed ground transportation system, ballast less track, elevated railways, 
underground and tube railways. 
 
MODULE III: [No. of lectures-10] 
Airport system planning, Airport strategic and master planning, Air Traffic demand forecasting, Airline 
operations and economics, Airspace and airport capacity and delay, From planning to construction, Airfield 
layout planning and design 
 
MODULE IV: [No. of lectures- 12] 
Passenger terminal planning, Air cargo facilities and logistic planning, Airport ground access, 
Environmental planning and management, Airport noise management, Airport land use compatibility 
planning, Planning for unmanned aircraft system and future air mobility. 
 
Text Books 
Satish Chandra and M. Agrawal, Railway Engineering, Second Edition, Oxford University Press 
Norman J. Ashford, Saleh Mumayiz, Paul H. Wright. Airport Engineering: Planning, Design, and 
Development of 21st Century Airports. John Wiley and Sons Inc. 
 
Additional reference 
C. Venkatramaiah. Transportation Engineering: Volume II: Railways, Airports, Docks and Harbors, Bridges 
and Tunnels. Universities Press (India) Private Ltd. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

92 
 



Title Infrastructure planning and design of ports and Number CI4XX0 
harbours 

Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech [CIE] Type Program Elective 

(PE) 
Prerequisite --   
Objectives 
In this course the students will learn to plan and design the elements of ports and harbours for water 
transportation. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
At the end of the course, the student should be able to: 
1. Understand various elements of ports and harbour infrastructures 
2. Forecast travel demand water transportation systems 
3. Understand the layout, design, and operation of ports and harbours 
4. Conceptually design a port and harbour system compatible with the surrounding land use 
 
Content 
MODULE I: [No. of lectures-12] 
Fundamentals-Tide and current conditions inside harbor, water circulation, breakwaters, jetties and quay 
walls; mooring, berthing and ship motion inside the port. Port layout, continuation of port layouts, port 
planning, harbour layout, Site characteristics, Bathymetric survey, Wave rose diagram 
 
MODULE II: [No. of lectures-15] 
Design issues of Sea port layout, Design of Port Infrastructures, Design of breakwaters, berm breakwater, 
Dredging and methods of disposal, Berthing structures- loads, analysis, and design, mooring berthing and 
seismic forces, Slipway, drydock,floating dock, shiplift, soil structure interaction, Ground improvement 
techniques 
 
MODULE III: [No.of lectures-7] 
Planning multipurpose port terminals. Operation- Allowable wave conditions for cargo handling and 
human safety on quays and breakwaters, forecasting / nowcasting of wave and current conditions for port 
operations  
 
MODULE IV: [No. of lectures-8] 
VTMS and management of computerized container terminal, safety & environment. Maintenance of 
waterways, construction of environmentally engineered banks, Impact of possible climate change scenarios, 
sustainable development strategies for cities and ports. 
Text Books 
Gaythwaite, J. Design of Marine Facilities: Engineering for port and harbor structures. 3rd Edition, ASCE 
Press  
Richand L. Silister, Coastal Engineering Volume I &amp; II, Elsevier Publishers 
Tsinker, G. P. Handbook of Port and Harbour Engineering: Geotechnical and structural aspects, 
International Thomson Publishing 
 
Additional reference 
C. Venkatramaiah. Transportation Engineering: Volume II: Railways, Airports, Docks and Harbors, Bridges 
and Tunnels. Universities Press (India) Private Ltd. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

93 
 



Title IT and Telecom Infrastructure Number CI4XX0 

Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech [CIE] Type Program Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
The course will help students to understand the fundamentals of IT and telecommunication infrastructure 
and their integration for sustainable livelihood. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
At the end of the course, the student should be able to: 
1. Understand the components and functions of telecommunication. 
2. Understand the preliminaries of telecom tower construction 
3. Understand the fundamental elements of IT infrastructure such as networks and servers, storage, remote 

access, and  network security 
4. Understand the integration of information and communication technology for urban services 
 
Content 
MODULE I: [No. of lectures – 14] 
Telecommunication – definition, use, functions, and components, site surveys- raw land tower site survey 
and boundary survey, classification of telecommunication towers, Telecommunication signals, Design of 
towers – configuration, analysis of loads, design of tower members, design of foundation, tower erection, 
transmission lines construction, operation and maintenance of distribution systems. Overview of - the role 
of telecommunication in IT industry, telecom network management, and wireless and mobile 
communication) 
 
MODULE II: [No. of lectures – 13] 
IT infrastructure – components of IT infrastructure, Internet and world wide web, design, planning, and 
implementation of networks and servers, storage management , Backup / Restore Methodology, Remote 
Access, Control, Administration, Introduction to -Network security, cloud computing, cyber-physical 
system, Preliminary concepts on  Big data 
 
MODULE III: [No. of lectures – 15] 
Definition and concepts of Smart city, Intelligent city, Digital city, and Ecity. Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) in Urban services : Specific interests - Emergency response, water and 
electrical utilities, sewage treatment, Health, safety, and security; General interest: Public service and 
governance, Urban administration, Urban infrastructure planning 
 
Text Books 
1. Steve Morris, Up the Tower: The complete Guide to Tower Construction, Champion Radio Products 
2. Brian W. Smith, Communication Structures, Thomas Telford publications 
 
Additional reference 
1. Graham, S. and Marvin, S.  Planning Cybercities? Integrating Telecommunications into Urban 

Planning, The town planning review, 70(1), Liverpool University Press 
2. ICT in Urban services, Compendium of global good practices, National Institute of Urban affairs, 

http://pearl.niua.org/sites/default/files/books/GP-GL1_ICT.pdf 
3. Fundamentals of telecommunication. https://www.net.t-labs.tu-

berlin.de/teaching/computer_networking/documents/telecomm_fundamentals.pdf 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

94 
 



Title Green Building and Sustainable Number CI7XX0 
Materials 

Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech, M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. Type Program Elective (PE) 

[CIE] 
Prerequisite -   
Objectives 
Objectives of this course are: 
To introduce elements of green building construction and use of sustainable materials. 
To familiarize students with different national and international green performance ratings.  
To teach students methods of carbon footprint reduction and increase in energy efficiency of a building. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
A graduate of this course will have a thorough idea of: 
National and international green building assessment system and requirements. 
Green building design elements and use of sustainable materials. 
Techniques to reduce the carbon footprint of a green building. 
Management of hydrological cycle, treatment of waste, and maintenance of indoor air quality. 
Green building economics, business plan, and management. 
 
Content 
Introduction to green building: Rationale for high-performance green building; green building progress 
and obstacles; trends in high-performance green building; the green building movement. (Lectures: 3) 
 
Ecological design: design vs ecological design; contemporary ecological design; future ecological design; 
thermodynamics: limits on recycling and the dissipation of materials (Lectures: 3) 
 
Green building assessment: US green building assessment system; international green building assessment 
system; performance assessment. (Lectures: 3) 
 
LEED building rating system: history of LEED; structure of the LEED suite of building assessment systems; 
LEED credentials; the LEED process; LEED categories. (Lectures: 3) 
 
The Green Globes building assessment system: the Green Globes process; Green Globes verification and 
certification; structure of the ANSI/GBI 01-2010 standard; the Green Globes professional and Green Globes 
Assessor. (Lectures: 3) 
 
Green building design process: conventional vs green building delivery systems; executing the green 
building project; the integrated design progress; role of Charrette in the design process; green building 
documentation requirements. (Lectures: 3) 
 
Sustainable site and landscape: land and landscape approaches for green buildings; sustainable landscapes; 
enhancing ecosystems; stormwater management; low-impact development; heat island mitigation; light 
trespass and pollution reduction; sustainable site initiative. (Lectures: 3) 
 
Energy and carbon footprint reduction: building energy issues; high-performance building energy design 
strategy; passive design strategy; building envelope; internal load reduction; active mechanical system; 
water-heating system; electrical power systems; innovative energy optimization strategies; renewable 
energy systems; fuel cells; smart buildings and energy management systems; ozone-depleting chemicals in 
HVAC&R systems; reducing carbon footprint of the built environment. (Lectures: 4) 
 
Built environment hydrological cycle: global water resource depletion; hydrological cycle terminology; 
high-performance building hydrological cycle strategy; designing the high-performance building 
hydrological cycle; water budget rules of thumb; sustainable stormwater management; landscaping water 
efficiency. (Lectures: 4) 
 

95 
 



Closing materials loops: distinguishing between green building products and green building materials; 
LCA of building materials and products; environmental product declaration; materials and product 
certification systems; emerging construction materials and products; design for deconstruction. (Lectures: 
4) 
 
Indoor environmental quality: IEQ issues; design; main components of integrated IEQ design; emission 
from building materials; economic benefits of good indoor environmental quality. (Lectures: 3) 
 
Construction operations and commissioning: site protection planning; indoor air quality during 
construction; construction materials management; construction and demolition waste management. 
(Lectures: 3) 
 
Green building economics: the business case for high-performance green building; the economics of green 
building; quantifying green building benefits. (Lectures: 3) 
 
Text Books 
Charles J. Kibert (2013). Sustainable Construction. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-118-33013-5 
J. Newman and Ban Sang Choo (2003) Advanced Concrete Technology-Constituent Materials (1st Ed), 
Elsevier. ISBN 9780080489988. 
S. Kubba (2010) LEED Practices, Certification, and Accreditation Handbook (1st Ed) Elsevier. ISBN 
9780080958590. 
 
Additional reference 
Ministry of Power, Energy Conservation Building Code 2018, Revised Version, Bureau of Energy Efficiency, 
2018, 
Indian Building Congress, Practical Handbook on Energy Conservation in Buildings, 1 st ed. Nabhi 
Publication, 2008. 
TERI-Griha’s Green Design practices (www.teriin.org/bcsd/griha/griha.htm) 
Sartori, I., and Hestnes, A. G. “Energy use in the life cycle of conventional and low-energy buildings: A 
review article”, Energy and Buildings., 20, 249-257.2007 
Green Building Basics, California Integrated Waste Management Board 
(www.ciwmb.ca.gov/GREENBUILDING/Basics.htm#What) 
Catarina Thormark. “A low energy building in a life cycle—its embodied energy, energy need for operation 
and recycling potential”, Building and Environment., 37, 429-435.2001. 
 
Online course Material 
“NOC:Energy Efficiency, Acoustics and Daylighting in Building” by Prof. B. Bhattacharjee on NPTEL. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/102/105102175/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

96 
 



Title Smart Infrastructure: Design and Number CI5XX0 
Simulation 

Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 0-0-4 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech  [CIE] Type Program Compulsory 

(PC) for specialization 
Prerequisite -   
Design/Simulation experiments 
Hands-on-experience and response monitoring of instrumentation such as sensors, accelerometers, strain 
gauges, LVDTs, fiber optics, smart sensors, data acquisition systems etc. 
Monitoring instrumentation placement and layout design in the campus pipeline system through optimal 
sensor placement (OSP) approach 
Beam-column damage identification and analysis through digitized sensors and FE simulation (Ansys LS-
DYNA) 
Health monitoring and fatigue analysis of scaled infrastructure models in the laboratory using Machine 
Learning, Artificial Intelligence techniques and Ansys Mechanical simulation 
Vibration monitoring of campus entities using High-speed visual measuring system 
Digital twin development of built environment using Ansys Twin Builder 
Safety and security planning of campus entities using Ansys Medini Analyze 
Simulation of multimodal transportation system using VISSIM 
Development of driver behaviour models in the context of Indian traffic using Ansys VRXPERIENCE  
Planning and monitoring of power infrastructure in the campus 
Automated water distribution system planning for the campus 
Planning of automated-digitized environmental aspects (solid waste management and air pollution control) 
for the campus 
Spatial data analysis and remote sensing application for land use optimization for smart city design through 
simulations (ArcGIS, etc.) 
Smart city and green field city design through data-driven simulation (Programs-Urban Sim, SimCities, 
Siradel, etc.) 
 
Text Books 
Raj, P., & Raman, A. C. (2015). Intelligent Cities: Enabling Tools and Technology. CRC Press. 
Meneguette, R. I., De Grande, R. E., & Loureiro, A. A. (2018). Intelligent transport system in smart cities. 
Springer: Cham, Switzerland. 
Deakin, Mark; Al Waer, Husam (Eds.) (2012), From Intelligent to Smart Cities, Routledge, Taylor & Francis, 
USA and Canada 
 
Articles 
Berglund, E. Z., Monroe, J. G., Ahmed, I., Noghabaei, M., Do, J., Pesantez, J. E., ... & Levis, J. (2020). Smart 
Infrastructure: A Vision for the Role of the Civil Engineering Profession in Smart Cities. Journal of 
Infrastructure Systems, 26(2), 03120001. 
ASCE. (2017) Infrastructure Report Card: A comprehensive assessment of America’s infrastructure. Reston, 
VA: ASCE. 
Li, L., Aoyama, T., Takaki, T., Ishii, I., Yang, H., Umemoto, C., ... & Fujiwara, A. (2017). Vibration 
distribution measurement using a high-speed multi thread active vision. In 2017 IEEE International 
Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics (AIM) (pp. 400-405). IEEE. 
Manual, A. U. S. (2016). Ansys user’s manual. SAS IP inc. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

97 
 



Title Transmission Infrastructure Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-PhD, Ph.D Type SSE  
Prerequisite    

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge related to infrastructure in various modes of power transmission such as 
underground, marine, and overhead. 
2. Provide knowledge related to design, installation, and maintenance of the transmission infrastructure. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Select appropriate transmission infrastructure needed for transmission of electric power based on various 
factors. 
2.  Design, install, and maintain power transmission infrastructure. 
 
Contents 
Overhead transmission lines: Overhead line routing, aerial survey, ground survey, overhead line 
foundations, soil investigation, foundation types, foundation design, support structures, steel lattice towers, 
tower testing, overhead line fittings, suspension clamps, sag adjusters, bi-metal connectors, conductor 
loads, lightning, surge diverters, insulator arcing horn co-ordination, aerodynamic phenomena, 
transmission voltage level clearances, wooden poles, distribution voltage clearances, overhead line 
maintenance, environmental considerations (18 lectures) 
 
Underground cables: Types of cable, insulation and conductor materials, air cable ampacity, underground 
cable ampacity, short circuit and its effect, thermal & electromechanical stresses, cable termination and 
joints, pulling the cable, installing cable racks, conduits, cable supports, cable tray and trenches, cable 
testing, steps for fault location, fault location methods (12 lectures) 
 
Marine cables: Introduction, marine survey, cable routing, cable system design parameters, cable design 
parameters, cable accessories, cable installation, cable materials & accessories, cable joints and terminations, 
inspections and testing, maintenance and failure investigation (12 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. Kiessling,F., Nefzger,P., Nolasco,J.F., Kaintzyk,U., (2003), Overhead Power Lines Planning Design 

Construction, 4th Edition, Springer 
2. Ganguli,S.K., Kohli,V., (2016), Power Cable Technology, CRC Press 
3. Worzyk,T., (2009), Submarine Power Cables Design, Installation, Repair, Environmental Aspects, 

Springer 
4. Bayliss,C., Hardy,B., (2012), Transmission and Distribution Electrical Engineering, 4th Edition, Newnes 

publications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

98 
 



Title Fate of Chemicals in the Environment Number CI7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering  3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization Stream 

Elective 
Prerequisite Chemistry, Flow Mechanics, Soils   
Objectives 
1. To provide a qualitative understanding of what happens to chemicals as it enters an environment. 
2. To inculcate the dynamics of chemicals as they interact with different phases during their transport. 
3. To inculcate different ways of chemical transport.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. To enable identification of mass transport and distinguish various chemical transformations. 
2. Able to predict mobilizing and spreading of chemicals in a media or material or a volume of air 
3. Relate the general fate of contaminants when passing through water, air and soil due to forces such as 

precipitation.   
 
Contents 
Basics of Mass transport: Continuity Thought of Chemicals; Earth’s Environmental Compartments, 
Lavosier species, Mass Balances, history of mass conservation, basic concept of chemical fate [Lectures 6]. 
 
Modes of Transport: Ficks law of diffusion, films and finite fluid layers, dispersion, advection of solutes 
and particles in fluids. Turbulent diffusion, film theory, penetration, surface renewal, and boundary layer 
thought [Lectures 6]. 
 
Transformation and Phases: Phases, Partitioning coefficients, Aspects of Equilibrium with Dissociating 
chemicals, Partitioning in multi-component systems, Basics of fugacity-Mackay models [Lectures 6]. 
 
Soils: Soil and Its Functions, soil nutrients and contamination, Diffusion/advection equation for transport 
in soil, infiltration and leaching, evaporation and capillary transport,  Analytical Solutions for Vertical 
Transport in Soil [Lectures 6]. 
 
Precipitation and Streams: Land use, Hydrological Data, Hydrograph, Analytical Steady-State Surface 
Water Model, Runoff, Streams, Mass Balances and Plug flow [Lectures 6]. 
 
Surface Waters: Wetlands, constructed systems, Mass balances on wetland systems, Nutrient loading 
criteria, Streeter-Phelps Equation, Waste Load allocation and Dissolved gases in river waters [Lectures 6]. 
 
Atmospheric Transport: Area and Point source of pollutants in air, box model for area source plume model 
for point sources, dry and wet deposition at surfaces or soil, uptake by plant roots, transpiration, 
metabolism and photo-degradation [Lectures 5]. 
 
Text Books 
Louis J. Thibodeaux, Environmental Chemodynamics: Movement of Chemicals in Air, Water, and Soil, 2nd 
Edition,1996, ISBN: 978-0-471-61295-7 
Stefan Trapp, and Michael Matthies, Chemodynamics and Environmental Modeling, Springer-Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg 1998, ISBN-13: 978-3-642-80431-1 e-ISBN-13: 978-3-642-80429-8 
 
Open Source Models 
ICECRM 1.1 (indoor chemical exposure classification/ranking model) 
The CoZMoMAN Model- The Multimedia fate and transport models 
The Global Distribution Model (Globo-POP Version 1.1)- Global fate of organic chemicals 
 
NPTEL  
Dr Bhanu Prakash Vellanki,Environmental Remediation of Contaminated sites,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/107/105107181/, IIT Roorkee 
Dr Manoj Datta, Geoenvironmental Engineering, (Environmental Geotechnology); Landfills, Slurry Ponds 
& Contaminated Sites, IIT Delhi https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/102/105102160/# 

99 
 



Title Climate Change and Impact Number CI7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-4 [5] 
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization Stream 

Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
To gain understanding of scientific foundation and key concepts of atmospheric science, climate data 
collection and impacts of GHGs. 
To develop the scientific basis of our understanding of the climate system and climate change, and 
associated uncertainties. 
To provide knowledge on the impacts of climate change on the natural world in the current scenario and 
coming centuries. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in: 
Understanding the present climate system in the context of Earth’s history, reconstructing climate evolution 
and relevant scientific uncertainties.  
Developing basics of climate change science with key concepts of climate, weather, energy balance and 
GHG effect. 
Understanding energy flows within the Earth-Atmosphere system.  
Explaining the large-scale atmospheric circulations with underlying fluid mechanics principles and role of 
oceans in climate variability. 
Developing scientific understanding of climate forcing, sensitivity and feedback systems.  
Understanding the basics of energy balance models and fundamental equations of Global Circulation 
Models for simulating and estimating past and future climate systems. 
Understanding the potential impacts of climate change and future climate change projections. 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Climate and Climate Change: Evolution of Earth’s climate: history, Instrumental and 
paleoclimatic record, Climate Change: Definition, Components of climate system, Global energy balance, 
GHGs and Greenhouse effect [Lectures 5]. 
Radiative Energy Transfer: Radiation laws, Radiation Processes, Absorption and Scattering by Gases and 
Particles, Solar Zenith Angle and Aerosol Optical Depth, Radiative Transfer Equation [Lectures 5]. 
Convection and Atmospheric Circulation:  Dry and moist convection, Atmospheric convection and types, 
Scales of motion, Energy and Momentum Transport [Lectures 7]. 
Oceanic Circulation: Physical characteristics of ocean, Energy transport mechanism: Wind driven 
circulation theories, and thermohaline circulation [Lectures 4]. 
Climate sensitivity and feedback mechanisms: Equilibrium Climate sensitivity, Transient Climate 
Response, Feedback: Concept, Fast and slow feedback mechanisms/Processes, Climate sensitivity estimates 
[Lectures 5]. 
Climate Variability:  Buffering atmospheric temperature changes, Atmosphere-ocean coupling: El Nino and 
Southern Oscillations [Lectures 3]. 
Climate modeling: One layer energy balance model, 1D EBM, Global Circulation Model, difference between 
Weather forecast models and GCMs [Lectures 8]. 
Climate Change Impacts and future projections: Sea level rise, Ecosystem and biodiversity, Shifting water 
resources, Agricultural impacts, severe weather impacts and Human health; Impact assessment of GHGs 
on global temperature, rainfall and drought patterns, atmospheric circulation. [Lectures 5]. 
Laboratory  
Time series analysis of century-long historical temperature records to understand climate variability and 
examine evidence of global warming. 
Statistical analysis of sea surface temperature for identification of ENSO (El Nino-Southern Oscillations) 
events. 
Hadley Circulation interpretation using NASA MERRA reanalysis model. 
Model scenarios of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the current century and simulate first-order 
response of the earth system (e.g., ClimateSim simulator). 
Download emissions data from satellite observations and compare with existing emission inventories. 

100 
 



Hand-on experience on installation of Regional/ Global Climate model (RCM/GCM) and performing 
simulations to compare the model output (climate variables and Emissions) under different Representative 
Concentration Pathways (RCPs) with existing emission inventories.    
Group report on “ Scientific Evidence for Anthropogenic Climate Change” 
  
Text Books 
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics- From Air Pollution to Climate Change, J. H. Seinfeld and S. N. Pandis, 
John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Third Edition, 2013. 
Fundamentals of Atmospheric modeling, Marck Jacobson, Cambridge University Press, Second Edition, 
2005. 
Air Pollution and Global Warming: History, Science and Solutions, Mark Jacobson, Cambridge University 
Press, Second Edition, 2012. 
Atmosphere, Ocean, and Climate Dynamics, John Marshall and R. Alan Plumb, Elsevier Academic Press, 
2008. 
 
Online course Material 
https://courses.edx.org/courses/course-v1:SDGAcademyX+CCSI001+3T2019/course/ 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/119106008/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

101 
 



Title Remote Sensing and GIS for Environment Number CI7XX0 
Management 

Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE-EE] Type Specialization 

Stream Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
To introduce you to the basic principles of observing the Earth’s geography and concepts of remote sensing  
To explore its applications specific to the environment and natural resource management. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Identify and obtain appropriate satellite imagery for a land surface based resource management, service 
infrastructure and real world application  
Demonstrate proficiency in the common ( open source: QGIS/ Google Earth Engine, ERDAS Imagine, 
ENVI) and advanced (ARCGIS, Ecognition, QT modeler) remote sensing software packages 
Conduct basic to intermediate remote sensing analyses (atmospheric and geographic corrections, spectral 
transformations and enhancements, classification, modelling and change detection)  
 
Contents 
In-situ field observation; data collection; Photographic and Remote Sensing data collection, Spectral spatial 
and temporal aspects, analog and digital processing introduction and sensing economics [4] 
Electromagnetics: conduction, convection and radiation; radiation and its models, [6].  
Aerial Photography- Camera, photography filtration-films, planning field missions [4] 
Photogrammetry : Aerial photography, stereoscopy and its principles, image digitization, aero-
triangulation, extracting spot elevation, contours and DEMs using soft copy photography, Ortho-imagery 
and Area Measurement [6] 
Multispectral Imagery: discrete detectors and scanning mirrors, Landsat: multi-spectral scanner,  thematic 
mapper, Enhanced Thematic Mapper plus (Landsat 7), , GOES-,AVHRR Radiometer, Aircraft Multispectral 
Scanners[8] 
Thermal Infrared Remote Sensing: Thermal infrared radiation properties, laws (Stefan-bolzmann, Wein’s, 
Kirchoff’s)[2]  
Microwave Remote Sensing: RADAR, SAR remote sensing, Radar interferometry, LIDAR Passive 
Microwave Remote Sensing- Radiometers. [3] 
Visual image Interpretation: The aerial/regional perspective, 3D depth perspective [5] 
Digital Image Interpretation and Analysis: Preprocessing of Images, Image Enhancement, Contrast and 
basics of spatial feature manipulation. [5] 
Note: Labs will have hands-on use of the latest Google Earth Engine (GEE), QGIS, ERDAS IMAGINE, and 
ArcGIS software. It will also look into application of remote sensing imagery in soil and water analysis, 
overlaying data retrieved from different subject areas of engineering, lidar imagery and other GIS data. 
List of experiments in Surveying based Laboratory  
To assess the distance between two inaccessible points in a specific area using a compass as well as plotting 
the area using closed traverse (prismatic compass).  
To solve two-point, and three-point problems using plane table survey.  
To understand differential levelling, vertical/cross sectional plotting and contouring using automatic 
levellers. 
To survey a nearby plot bounded by any polygon using a theodolite and also to perform trigonometric 
levelling to find the characteristics of a nearby building.  
To plot a known area using GPS measurements and assess the accuracy of the measurement 
Using total station to combine electromagnetic distance measurement and electronic theodolite to 
understand the ramp in the institute and their geometrical features with high accuracy.  
List of experiments in GIS Laboratory  
To create a map of any area using vector data models using available ground data. 
To perform geo-referencing when coordinate values are not given.  
To study terrain data such as slope, aspect, and hill shade. How to use these for representation of different 
social/service as well as frequency of different aspects concerning demographic data.  
To create a stream network or perform stream order generation or delineate watersheds created by a water 
body using DEM files.  

102 
 



To perform site suitability analysis for a service building (example hospital) near to an agricultural and 
inhabited land near an arid village at the edge of an oasis near Jodhpur.  
Basic experiments on image sharpening and image resolution using ArcGIS/ ERDAS IMAGINE processing 
tool. 
 
Text Books 
John R. Jenkins, Remote Sensing of the Environment: An Earth Perspective 
Lillesand, T.M., Kiefer, R.W. & Chipman, J.W. 2008. Remote Sensing and Image Interpretation, 6th Edition, 
John Wiley and Sons.  
 
Reference Books 
Floyd F. Sabins, Remote Sensing: Principles and Applications (3rd edition), Publisher : Waveland Press, 
Edition : 3rd, Print ISBN : 9781577665076, 1577665074, eText ISBN : 9781478618171.0 
Gopi, S., Sathikumar, R., and Madhu, N., Advanced Surveying: Total Station, GIS and Remote Sensing, 
Pearson, 2007, Dorling Kindersley (India).ISBN 978-81-3017-0067-9. 
Barrett, E.C. & Curtis, L.F. 2007. Introduction to Environmental Remote Sensing, Routledge Publisher. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

103 
 



Title Solid Waste Management Number CI7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M. Tech, M. Tech-Ph.D. [CIE-EE] Type Specialization Stream 

Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
To enable understanding of life cycle of waste generation to disposal or sustainable re-use 
To inculcate basic steps of solid waste management  
To enable selection of best possible location specific solid waste management options  
 
Learning Outcomes 
Conceptually design waste conversion/treatment processes 
Able to assess the environmental and the economic impact of specific types of solid waste generated and its 
reuse  
Enabled to develop innovative and smarter solutions of solid waste management at rural and urban 
environs 
 
Contents 
Solid waste type and Classification, Quantity, Types of Waste Stream and its life cycle Waste Generation- 
Industrial, Municipal and Agriculture, 4R strategies and Social costs [Lectures 4]. 
Collection and Transport: Collection Components, their Reliability, Scavengers, Automated Waste 
Collection, Design for Larger Transfer Operations, Automated Control, Inventory and Monitoring [Lectures 
5]. 
Separation and Processing Techniques: Separation and Screening Equipment, Automated Sorters, Solid 
Waste Processing, Recovering, Waste to Energy transformation, E-Waste, Size Reduction, Incineration and 
pyrolysis [Lectures 6]. 
Options for Disposal, Selection Criteria, Sanitary Landfill, Properties of Gases from Landfills, Hazards and 
Air Pollution, , Leachate Control and Management [Lectures 5]. 
Composting: Benefits of Composting, Biological Processes Involved in Composting Chemical Processes, 
Physical Processes, Thermodynamics of Compositing, Gasifying, Refuse-derived fuel, Thoughts on Circular 
Economy [Lectures 8]. 
Microbiology: Biological decomposition, Microbiology of composting, Municipal solid waste Pathogens, 
enteric microbes in landfills and leachate, Pure culture, Mixed culture screening tests [Lectures 6]. 
Reuse and Recycle: Reuse, Increased Product Lifetime, Material Life Cycle Studies, Recycling, New 
Materials-Self Destructing/Organic, MSW Handling Rules, Public Aptitude, and Legislation [Lectures 6]. 
 
Text Books 
George Tchobanoglous, Hilary Theisen, Samuel Vigil, Integrated Solid Waste Management: Engineering 
Principles and Management Issues, McGraw-Hill Series in Water Resources and Environmental 
Engineering, ISBN-10: 0070632375, ISBN-13: 978-0070632370 
Kanti L. Shah, Basics of Solid and Hazardous Waste Management Technology, Prentice Hall, ISBN-10: 
0139603786, ISBN-13: 978-0139603785 
Ni-Bin Chang, Ana Pires, Sustainable Solid Waste Management: A Systems Engineering Approach, Wiley-
IEEE Press; 1 edition (March 16, 2015), ISBN-10: 1118456912, ISBN-13: 978-1118456910  
 
References Books 
Edward A. McBean, Frank A. Rovers, Grahame J. Farquhar, Solid Waste Landfill Engineering and Design, 
Prentice Hall; ISBN-10: 0130791873, ISBN-13: 978-0130791870 
Christian Ludwig, Stefanie Hellweg, Municipal Solid Waste Management , Springer 2003, London, ISBN 
978-3-642-62898-6.  
Roger Tim Haug, Composting Engineering: Principles and Practice, Ann Arbor Science, MI, ISBN-0-250-
40347-1 
 
Online Resources 
T V Ramachandra Municipal Solid Waste Management, IISc Bangalore 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/120108005/ 
Solid and Hazardous Waste Management,IITM, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105106056/ 

104 
 



Title Advanced Wastewater Treatment Number CI7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering,  L-T-P 3-0-2 [4] 

(ii) Civil and Infrastructure Engineering [C] 
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE-EE] Type (i) Programme Elective for 

Chemical Engineering,  
(ii) Specialization Stream 
Elective for Environmental 
Engineering 

Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
Impart comprehensive knowledge of industrial and municipal wastewater. 
Discuss mechanism and methodologies for wastewater treatment. 
Discuss case studies.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the:  
1. Comprehensive knowledge of wastewater treatment.  
2. Knowledge of advanced methodologies such as recycle and reuse. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Waste water engineering: an overview, characterisation of waste water and  
monitoring of industrial and municipal wastewater, emerging contaminants, environmental impacts of 
wastewater constituents [Lectures 4]. 
Conventional Water and WasteWater Treatment: Existing unit operations and processes, basic  
philosophy of water treatment plants; physio-chemical treatment methods: (i)    Screening, (ii) 
conventional filtration (iii) coagulation, (iv) flocculation, (v) floatation (vi) Clari- flocculation (vii) 
sedimentation, (viii) sand filtration, etc. [Lectures 10]. 
Aerobic and Anaerobic Suspended and Attached Growth WasteWater Treatment Processes:  
Aerated lagoon, activated sludge systems, trickling filter, sequential batch reactor, fluidized bed 
bioreactors, Up-flow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB) and hybrid Up-flow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket 
(UASB) reactors [Lectures 8]. 
Advanced Treatment Processes: Membrane Filtration, reverse osmosis, ultrafiltration,  
nanofiltration and electrodialysis; wet air oxidation, adsorption and ion-exchange; Wet- 
land and root-zone treatment of industrial and municipal wastes; Design of sludge drying  
beds, thermal and biological processes for sludge and land fillings. Membrane Reactors,  
New Technologies for Wastewater Disinfection [Lectures 12]. 
Water Recycling and Reuse: Different unit operations for water recycling depending on  end use, energy 
considerations, recovery of valuables from wastewater, zero liquid discharge (ZLD) [Lectures 8].  
Wastewater design lab [28 hours] 
Clarifier 
Aerator 
Sand filtration system 
Municipal waste water system 
Grey water treatment system 
Sewage water treatment system 
Industrial waste water systems 
Pond water treatment 
 
Text Books 
Burton F.L., Tchobanoglous G., Stensel H.D., 2017, WasteWater Engineering Treatment and Reuse, 
4thed.,Tata McGraw-Hill. 
Arceivala S.J. and Asolekar S.R., 2007, Wastewater Treatment for Pollution Control and Reuse, 3rd Ed., 
Tata McGraw Hill. 
 
Reference Books 

105 
 



Henze M., van-Loosdrecht M.C.M., Ekama G.A. and Brdjanovic D., 2008, Biological Wastewater 
Treatment: Principles, Modelling and Design, IWA publishing. 
Sincero A.P. and Sincero G.A., 1996, Environmental Engineering – A Design Approach, Prentice-Hall. 
Online Course Material 
Tiwari M K, Wastewater treatment and recycling, NPTEL course material, Department of Civil 
Engineering, IIT Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105178/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

106 
 



Title Environmental Economics and Number CI7XX0 
Management 

Department (i) Civil and Infrastructure L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Engineering 
(ii) School of Management and 
Entrepreneurship 

Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization Stream 
Elective 

Prerequisite    
Objectives 
To introduce the methods used by Economists in analyzing environment related issues. 
To introduce concepts of positive and normative aspects of Environmental Economics. 
To provide knowledge on different approaches such as Regulations and Incentive based Programs used 
in controlling pollution. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in: 
The students are expected to achieve proficiency in: 
Explaining the interactions between the economy and environment. 
Understanding the concepts of market failure and their role in determining the level of environmental 
quality. 
Understanding the role of costs and benefits in environmental decision-making processes.  
Explaining the conceptual framework and theoretical basis of economic valuation research 
Recognizing and implementing the most appropriate techniques while performing economic valuation 
research.                                              
Employing regulatory tools to deal with pollution control. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: The environment and economics, Cost of Environmental Protection, Positive and 
Normative Analysis [Lectures 4]. 
Principles of Environmental and Resource Economics: Markets and Market Failure, cost-benefit analysis 
[Lectures 10]. 
Economic Valuation: Random utility models in environmental valuation, Hedonic Price Method, 
Defensive Expenditures and the Travel Cost Method, Contingent Valuation [Lectures 10]. 
Controlling Pollution: : Regulation, Pigouvian Fees/ Emission Fees & Marketable permits, Property 
Rights and Marketable Permits, Regulation over Time and Space/ Transboundary Pollution, Regulations 
under Uncertainty (Regulating Polluters with Unknown Costs) [Lectures 12]. 
Life Cycle Assessment of Products, Processes and Services; Special topics and case studies on 
environmental economics; Environmental Justice and Environmental Ethics; Environmental Movement; 
Environmental Activism [Lectures 6]. 
 
Text Books 
Environmental Economics, Charles. D. Kolstad, Oxford University Press, Second Edition, 2011. 
Environmental Economics in Theory and Practice, N. Hanley, J. F. Shorgen, B. White, Macmillan. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

107 
 



Title Environmental Impact Assessment Number CI7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Civil and Infrastructure 
Engineering 

Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type (i) Programme Elective for Chemical 
Engineering, (ii) Specialization 
Stream Elective for Environmental 
Engineering 

Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The instructor will:  
Impart the knowledge to the students with the methods of assessment of environmental impacts due to 
developmental and industrial activities.  
Expose the students with the EIA regulations and EMP.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the: 
In-depth knowledge of the methods of assessment of environmental impacts due to developmental and 
industrial activities.  
In-depth knowledge of EIA regulations and EMP.  
 
Contents 
Introduction to EIA; definitions and concepts; evolution of EIA; historical development of EIA; 
forecasting environmental changes; strategic environmental assessment; ISO provisions, environmental 
clearance procedure [Lectures 11]. 
EIA documentation and processes; preliminary stages of EIA; project types and screening; impact 
prediction; evaluation and mitigation; EIA monitoring and auditing. [Lectures 11]. 
EIA regulations; TOR for EIAs; environmental indices, EIA at regional level, sectoral level, and policy 
level; sustainable development; Environmental Management Plan (EMP) [Lectures 11]. 
Future strategies and EIA case studies [Lectures 9]. 
 
Text Books 
Canter, L., Environmental Impact Assessment, McGraw Hill, New York, 1996. 
 
Reference Books 
World Bank, ‘Environmental Assessment SourceBook’, Environment Dept., Washington D.C., 1991. 
Rau, G.J. and Wooten, C.D., Environmental Impact Analysis Handbook, McGraw Hill, New York, 1980. 
Preventive environmental management. 
 
Online course Material 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/127105018/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

108 
 



Title Machine Learning for Environmental Number CI7XX0 
Engineering 

Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization Stream 

Elective 
Prerequisite Statistics for Environmental   

Engineering 
Anti-requisite Machine Learning-I   
Objectives 
To introduce students to various multivariate data analysis tools to deal with multi-dimensional data. 
Appreciate the areas of Environmental Engineering problems and issues where they can be effectively 
applied.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will be able to: 
1.   Identify appropriate multivariate data analysis techniques. 
2.   Develop a good understanding of the conceptual framework of how these multivariate techniques 

work and applied. 
 
Contents 
(Fractal 1) CSL7XX1: Machine Learning I: Supervised Learning 1-0-0[1] 
Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic regression [Lectures 2]. 
Gradient Descent: Introduction, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Subgradients, Stochastic Gradient Descent 
for risk minimization [Lectures 2]. 
Support Vector Machines: Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel trick, 
Implementing Soft SVM with Kernels [Lectures 4]. 
Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests [Lectures 2]. 
 
Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural networks, SGD and 
Backpropagation [Lectures 3]. 
Model selection and validation: Validation for model selection, k-fold cross-validation, Training-
Validation-Testing split, Regularized loss minimization [Lecture 1]. 
(Fractal 2) CSL7XX2: Machine Learning I: Unsupervised Learning and Generative Models 1-0-0[1] 
Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality [Lecture 1]. 
Clustering: Linkage-based clustering algorithms, k-means algorithm, Spectral clustering [Lectures 3]. 
Dimensionality reduction: Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, Compressed sensing 
[Lectures 2]. 
Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimator, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant Analysis, Latent 
variables and Expectation-maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning [Lectures 5]. 
Feature Selection and Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations, Feature learning [Lectures 
4]. 
(Fractal 3) Application to Environmental Data 1-0-1 [1]: Assessment of Surface water quality parameters; 
Assessment of Landfill leachate treatment; Air Quality Assessment and source recognition; Spatial 
differences in river estuaries and possible sources, Miscellaneous case studies [Lectures 14]. 
 
Text Books 
1. Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis, Johnson, R. A. and Wichern, D. W., Pearson Prentice Hall, 

Sixth Edition, 2007. 
2.  Multivariate Statistical Methods: A Primer, Manly, B. F. J., Chapman and Hall/CRC, Third Edition, 

2005. 
3.  Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis, Wolfgang, K. H. and Leopold, S., Springer, Fourth Edition, 

2015. 
4. Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory to Algorithms, Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben-David,S., 

Cambridge University Press, 2014.  
5. Applied Statistics for Environmental Science with R, Alkarkhi, A. F. M. and Alqaraghuli, W. A. A., 

Elsevier, ISBN 978-0-12-818622-0.  
 

109 
 



Reference Books 
Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill  
 
Online course material 
https://online.stat.psu.edu/stat505/ 
 
Self Learning Material 
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University,    https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

110 
 



Title Geomorphology Number CI7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization Stream 

Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The instructor will:  
Introduction to different geological processes behind observed geomorphological features. 
Complete understanding of depositional and erosional landforms created in different environments. 
Knowledge of natural hazards and application of geomorphology in managing them. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the: 
Understanding of physics and chemistry of geological processes and their interrelationship.  
Knowledge of spatial and temporal evolution of different landforms. 
Knowledge of geological hazard identification, risk assessment, and mitigation. 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Geomorphology: Introduction to geomorphology and physical geology; Earth’ 
components: atmosphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere, biosphere; The age of the earth: absolute dating 
methods; relative dating methods; Geological time scale [Lectures: 4] 
Weathering and Mass Wasting: Types of weathering: physical, mechanical, chemical, and biological; 
Rates of weathering; The stability of minerals; Weathering of common rocks; Mass wasting processes; 
Factors responsible for mass wasting [Lectures: 4] 
Fluvial Geomorphology: Development stages of a stream; Classification of streams; Genetic classification 
of streams;  Stream channels; Channel geomorphology; Drainage basin and system; Basin morphology; 
Geological work of streams; Fluvial landforms. [Lectures: 5] 
Desert Geomorphology: Process of wind erosion; Sediment transport by wind; Erosional landforms; 
Depositional landforms; Desert and desert types; Surface processes and desert landforms; Aridity. 
[Lectures: 4] 
Glacial Geomorphology: Formation of glaciers; Glacier movement; Glacier types; Glacial processes; 
Erosional landforms; Depositional landforms. [Lectures: 4] 
Coastal Geomorphology: Ocean waves, currents and tides; Oceanic sediments; Shore processes; Coastal 
erosion and sediment transport; Depositional features formed by waves. [Lectures: 5] 
Tectonic Geomorphology: Continental drift and evidence; Plate tectonics; Continental crust and plate 
tectonics; Causes of plate tectonics; geomorphic markers; Paleoseismology; Deformation and landscape 
responses. [Lectures: 4] 
Earthquakes: Location of an earthquake; Measurement and classification; The cause of origin; Spatial and 
temporal distribution of earthquakes; Earthquake hazard. [Lectures: 4] 
Volcanoes: Magma and lava flows; Global distribution of volcanoes; Classification of volcanoes; Modes 
of eruption; Volcanic Explosivity Index; Volcanic landforms; Submarine volcanoes. [Lectures: 4] 
Applied Geomorphology: Geomorphological hazard; Hazard assessment for risk analysis and risk 
management; Geomorphic hazards and sustainable development; Geomorphology and disaster 
prevention. [Lectures: 4] 
 
Text Books 
Sreepat Jain (2014) Fundamental of Physical Geology. Springer. ISBN 978-81-322-1539-4. 
Richard J. Huggett (2007). Fundamentals of Geomorphology (2nd Ed). Taylor & Francis Group. ISBN 978-
0-203-94711-1 ebk. 
 
Additional Reading 
Douglas W. Burbank, Robert S. Anderson (2011) Tectonic Geomorphology (2nd Ed). Wiley-Blackwell; 
ISBN: 978-1-444-33886-7 
Ro Charlton (2007) Fundamentals of Fluvial Geomorphology (1st Ed). Taylor & Francis Group. ISBN: 
9780203371084 
Eric C. F. Bird (2008) Coastal Geomorphology: An Introduction (2nd Ed). Wiley. ISBN: 978-0-470-51729-1 

111 
 



Anthony J. Parsons, A. D. Abrahams (2009) Geomorphology of Desert Environments. Springer. ISBN 978-
1-4020-5719-9 
I Alcántara-Ayala, A. Goudie (Eds.). (2010). Geomorphological Hazards and Disaster Prevention. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511807527 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

112 
 



Title GIS and Public health Number CI7XX0 
Department Civil and Infrastructure Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. [CIE] Type Specialization Stream 

Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
Providing exposure to the application of GIS in infectious and vector-borne diseases analysis. 
Introducing techniques of GIS in management of health services. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Ability to accurately model temporal and spatial distribution of health events.  
Knowledge of surveillance and mapping techniques for infectious and vector-borne diseases. 
Ability to identify healthcare “shortage” areas and analysis of access to healthcare services.  
 
Contents 
Geographic Information Systems: GIS functions; Trends in GIS applications; Public health application of 
GIS; GIS and the internet [Lectures 3]. 
Spatial data: Field and object data; Tessellation and vector data models; Measuring locations; Scale, 
projection, and symbols of cartographic data sources; Geographic data quality; Role of metadata [Lectures 
3]. 
Spatial Databases for Public Health: Foundation spatial data; population data; Health data; Making 
population and health data mappable; database integration; Data sharing [Lectures 3]. 
Mapping Health Information: Mapping process; representing health information; viewing health 
information; GIS and map publication [Lectures 3]. 
Analyzing Spatial Clustering of Health Events: Mapping disease rates; spatial clustering methods; space-
time clustering; choosing a clustering method; uses of spatial clustering methods [Lectures 4]. 
Analyzing Environmental Hazards: Source location analysis; modelling of fate, transport, and 
environment quality; GIS and exposure modelling; GIS and dose; outcome surveillance; environmental 
risk management; issues in environmental health mapping and analysis [Lectures 5]. 
Analyzing the Risk and Spread of infectious Diseases: Spatial diffusion; mapping case distributions; 
mapping the ecology of risk; temporal and geographical trends in disease outbreaks; forecasting spatial 
diffusion of communicable diseases; planning public health interventions; privacy and confidentiality 
[Lectures 5]. 
Exploring the Ecology of Vector-Borne Diseases: Global burden of zoomatic diseases and the challenge 
of emerging infectious diseases; surveillance and mapping of vector-borne diseases; modelling of vector-
borne diseases; environmental impacts of controlling vector-borne diseases; systematic perspective on 
disease [Lectures 4]. 
Analyzing Access to Health Services: mapping service locations; mapping health care needs and services; 
assessing potential access to health services; analysing service utilization [Lectures 4]. 
Locating Health Services: health care shortage areas; components and dimensions of health service 
delivery systems; client population distribution; meaning of “centrality” in health service facility location; 
normative models of facility location and service delivery; incorporating normative models of facility 
location and service delivery into GIS; spatial decision support systems [Lectures 4]. 
Health disparities: context and composition; visualizing and measuring area characteristics; defining 
neighbourhood contexts; modelling neighbourhood effects on health; location processes and link between 
location and well-being [Lectures 4]. 
 
Text Books 
GIS and Public Health, Ellen K. Cromley, Sara L. McLafferty, Guilford Publications, Second Edition, 2017, 
ISBN 978-1-60918-750-7. 
GIS in Public Health Practice, Ravi Maheswaram, Massimo Craglia, CRC Press, 2004, ISBN 0-415-30655-
8. 

 
 

113 
 



1. Introduction 

Engineering disciplines have become increasingly interdisciplinary in nature and Chemical Engineering is not an 
exception to that. The flexibility of opting for different specialization is ingrained in formulating the structure and 
curriculum of the Chemical Engineering programme. Traditionally, Chemical Engineering teaching is focused on 
transport phenomena, chemical engineering thermodynamics, mass transfer, fluid mechanics, heat transfer, chemical 
kinetics, computational systems and process control. With the advent of the era of Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine 
Learning (ML), Molecular Engineering, Industry 4.0 in Chemical Plants; the discipline is being transformed by 
incorporation of new emerging technologies. Through this Under-Graduate (UG) programme in Chemical 
Engineering, IIT Jodhpur is making conscious effort to divulge from traditional path and planning to establish itself to 
become a leading institute in this new genre of Chemical Engineering education, which includes foundational courses, 
fundamental courses in chemical engineering, emerging areas in chemical engineering, and sustainability aspects for 
chemical engineers.  
 
The program begins with students pursuing a common foundation in mathematics, physics, chemistry, engineering 
sciences, engineering design and programming. Students are expected to build on this foundation with the 
concentration on core chemical engineering subjects ranging from material and energy balance, process control, 
chemical engineering thermodynamics to chemical reaction engineering. Core courses are followed by a set of 
departmental electives that enable students to target their degree program towards in-depth knowledge of areas 
matching their specific interests.  The program ensures that the design experience, which includes both analytical 
studies and experiments, is integrated throughout the curriculum in a structured manner leading to advanced work. 
Students can tailor their focus areas in consultation with a faculty advisor. Students can choose their departmental 
electives (streams) from the following areas:  
1. Chemical Engineering Design; 
2. Process Engineering Intelligence 
3. Complex Fluids & Interfacial Engineering; 
4. Sustainability; 
5. Molecular Engineering and, 
6. Biochemical Engineering. 
7. Comprehensive understanding of these areas will provide graduates with the ability to adapt and maintain 

leadership roles through the application of fundamental principles to a rapidly changing and growing discipline. 
The curriculum also offers numerous options that enable students to gain practical experience, ranging from 
collaborative projects in industries to entrepreneurship opportunities at the institute's incubation centre. 

 
2. Objective of the program  

The key objectives of this program are to: 
1. Enable students to have fundamental understanding of the core concepts of Chemical Engineering. 
2. Offer opportunities for specialization in emerging and multidisciplinary areas including Molecular Engineering, 

Data Science and AI applications, Polymer Engineering, Sustainability, Biochemical Engineering and Complex 
Fluids & Interfacial Engineering. 

3. Empower students with emerging concepts for plant design in context of chemical engineering via courses designed 
with AI, ML, and Industry 4.0 applications. 

4. Integrate analytical and computational ability with experimental skills to create individuals competent in 
professional engineering practices in the domain of Chemical Engineering. 

5. Inculcate an attitude towards commitment to engineering ethics, leadership qualities, entrepreneurship and 
professional development. 

 
3. Expected Graduate Attribute  

Graduates of  B.Tech. program in Chemical Engineering will have: 
1. Strong understanding of mathematics, science and engineering fundamentals of Chemical Engineering. 
2. Aptitude to implement AI, ML, Molecular Engineering and Industry 4.0 relevant technologies in chemical 

companies. 

1 
 



3. Ability to use simulation and computational tools for a better understanding and designing of chemical 
processes/equipments. 

4. Technical competency for addressing sustainability issues and ability to provide technological solutions of 
sustainable nature.  

5. Entrepreneurial spirit to undertake disruptive innovations.   
6. Skills to communicate engineering concepts and ideas to peers in written or oral forms.  
7. Commitment towards professional ethics and have humanitarian engineering skills. 
 
4. Learning Outcome  

Graduates of the B.Tech. program in Chemical Engineering will: 
1. Gain a strong understanding of mathematics, science and engineering fundamentals of Chemical engineering 

including the concepts of material and energy balance; computational methods; transport phenomena; reaction 
engineering; mass transfer; thermodynamics; heat transfer; fluid mechanics and process control. 

2. Have the ability to design a process equipment or plant to meet desired requirements under socio-economic and 
environmental constraints.   

3. Be equipped with knowledge of emerging domains: (i) Data Science & AI applications; (ii) Molecular Engineering. 
4. Have technical capability for addressing sustainability issues related to water, energy and environment. 
5. Receive effective hands-on laboratory training as a part of laboratory courses and short-term research projects, and 

be able to design and conduct experiments as well as to analyse and interpret data. 
6. Develop their communication skills by participating in classroom presentations, entrepreneurial events, seminars 

and workshops. 
 
5. New skillsets targeted 

Graduates of UG programme in Chemical Engineering at IIT Jodhpur will have,   
1. Capability to design and develop process equipment and plants using computer-aided design and modelling 

software. 
2. Advanced technical capability to work with AI/ ML and Industry 4.0 aspects in chemical plants. 
3. Latest industrial aptitude in the areas of Recycle and Reuse, Zero Liquid Discharge (ZLD), Wealth from Waste, AI 

in Process Engineering, Molecular Engineering, Complex fluids and Interfacial Engineering, 3D Printing Materials 
and Processes, and Packaging of Electronic Devices.  

4. Fluency with scientific computing techniques via courses including Material and Energy Balance, Scientific 
Computations and Data Analytics in Process Modelling and Simulation. 

  

2 
 



6. Topic clouds and Mapping of Topic clouds with proposed course 
 
Table 1: Topics, and Mapping of Topics with Courses 

Area Topics Category  Course (PC/PE/IE/IS) 

Chemical Fluid Statics, Dynamics, Viscous Flow, Fundamentals and Fluid Mechanics (PC) 
Engineering Turbulence and Compressible Flow Techniques 
Design Fundamentals, Fluid Handling. 
 Material Balance, Energy Balance, Fundamentals Material and Energy 

Simultaneous Material & Energy Balance (PC) 
Balance. 
Liquid-Liquid Mass Transfer, Gas- Fundamentals and Mass Transfer (PC) 
Liquid Mass Transfer, Solvent Techniques 
Extraction. 
Conduction, Convection, Radiation, Fundamentals and Heat Transfer (PC) 
Boiling, Condensation, Heat Techniques 
Exchangers, Evaporators 
Kinetics of Homogeneous Reactions, Fundamentals and Chemical Reaction 
Batch Reactor, CSTR, PFR. Techniques Engineering (PC) 
Errors in computation, Linear systems Fundamentals Scientific Computations 
of equations, ODE, PDE  (PC) 
Thermodynamics of Chemical Reaction, Fundamentals Chemical Engineering 
Fugacity, Thermodynamic analysis of Thermodynamics (PC) 
processes  
Process Plant Design, Equipment Fundamentals and Process Plant Design & 
Design, Cost Economics Techniques Economics (PC) 
Transport Properties, Continuity Fundamentals Transport Phenomena (PC) 
Equation, Momentum, energy and mass  
transport. 
Different forms of Corrosion and Fundamentals Corrosion (IE) 
Mechanism 
Industrial Management, Hazards & Techniques Industrial Management and 
Safety, SOPs,  Safety for Chemical 

Engineers (PE) 
Product Design, Common Techniques and Product Design in Chemical 
Methodologies and Strategies Systems Engineering (PE) 
Conventional Unit Operations in Technique Unit Operations (PE) 
Process Industries, Filtration and 
Membrane Separation, floatation, 
sedimentation 
Fundamentals of Conventional Fundamentals, Membrane Technology (PE) 
Membrane Technology Techniques and 

Technology 
Process Conventional Process Control, AI in Fundamentals and Process Control and AI 
Engineering Process Industries Techniques Applications (PC) 
Intelligence Introduction of Machine Learning, Fundamentals Machine Learning (IE) 
 Neural Networks, Statistical Learning 
 Framework 
 

Neural network era, deep learning and Fundamentals and Applications of Artificial 
 

data science era, AI based modeling, techniques Intelligence in Chemical 
 

applications  Engineering (PE) 
 

Introductory Aspects of Petrochemical Fundamentals  Petrochemical Engineering 
Engineering (PE) 

3 
 



Data driven modeling of distillation Technology and Petroleum Refinery Process 
units, FCC, catalyst regeneration units techniques Modelling (PE) 
Reliability and Maintainability Fundamentals Basics of Reliability and 
Engineering, failure detection models, Maintainability Engineering 
reliability models, maintainability  for System Safety (PE) 
Calibration methods, signals and Fundamentals and Chemometrics (PE) 
process analysis in chemical plants, Techniques 
Spectroscopic data analysis 
Reactor models, Bayesian estimators, Fundamentals and Artificial Intelligence in 
observers, filters, applications techniques Chemical Reactor Control 

(PE)  
Introduction to AI, predicate logic, Fundamentals Artificial Intelligence-1 (PE) 
uncertain reasoning 
Basics of ML, decision trees, neural Fundamentals Machine learning-1 (PE) 
networks, foundation of deep learning 
Introduction to IoT architecture, Fundamentals and Introduction to Internet of 
sensing, actuation, cloud, edge and fog Technology Things (IoT) (PE), Sensors 
computing and IoT lab (PE) 
Sensor types, nanoparticles as Technology Nanosensors (PE) 
nanosensors, biosensors 
Introduction to mathematical Techniques Data Analytics in Process 
modelling, Equation solving Modelling and Simulation 
approaches, Decomposition of (PE) 
networks, Convergence Promotion 
Introduction to manufacturing systems, Fundamentals and Industry 4.0 Applications in 
cellular manufacturing, flexible, lean systems Manufacturing Systems (PE) 
and agile systems, cloud based 
manufacturing 

Complex fluids Fundamentals and Introductory Fundamentals and Colloids and Suspensions 
and interfacial Aspects of Colloids and Suspensions Techniques (IE) 
engineering Introduction to Polymer Fundamentals Polymer (IE) 

Fundamentals of Complex Liquids Fundamentals  Physics of Complex fluids 
(LS) 

Introductory aspects of Complex Fluids Fundamentals  Introduction to Complex 
Fluids (PE) 

Fundamentals of Interfacial Fundamentals  Interfacial Engineering in 
Engineering in Soft Matter Soft Matter (PE) 
Introduction, processes and Fundamentals & Bioprinting (PE) 
applications of bioprinting technology 
Various materials in 3-D printing and Technology 3-D Printing: Material 
their processing, Post-processing and Processing and Properties 
Inspection techniques (PE) 
Polymer Engineering and Principles Fundamentals and Introductory Principles in 

Techniques  Polymer Engineering (PE) 
Sustainability Environmental Studies Fundamentals Environmental Science (IS) 

Concepts of Conventional and Fundamentals, Solid Waste Management 
Emerging Waste Management Techniques and (PE) 

Technology 
Process related Air Pollution Control Techniques and Air Pollution Control 
Technology Technology Technology (PE) 

4 
 



Introduction of Rare-earth Materials Techniques and Processing of Rare-earth and 
and Radioactive Materials, Their Systems Radioactive Materials (PE) 
Processing, Unit Operations  
Different kinds of Energy Resources Technology and Energy Resources (PE) 
and their Utilization Systems 
Waste Water Characteristics, Techniques & Waste Water Treatment (PE) 
Conventional Treatment Systems 
Forecasting environmental changes, Fundamentals and Environmental Impact 
EIA monitoring and auditing, techniques Assessment (EIA) (PE) 
environmental management plan 
Advanced treatment methodologies, Techniques & Advanced Waste Water 
Recycle and Reuse, ZLD. Systems Treatment (PE) 
Introduction, design and applications Technology Microfluidic Fuel Cell (PE) 
Fundamentals of Catalytic reactions Fundamentals and Catalysis for Energy (PE) 
and its application for energy Technology 
production 
Hydrogen and methanol as fuel Techniques & Hydrogen & Methanol 
sources, production methodologies, Technology Economy (PE) 
Challenges 
Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion Fundamentals and Ocean Thermal Energy 
(OTEC) cycles, hybrid OTEC systems Technology Conversion (OTEC) 
and technological challenges Processes (PE) 

Molecular Introduction, approached and Fundamentals and Molecular engineering (PC) 
Engineering applications in molecular engineering technology 

Transport at molecular level, Boltzmann Fundamentals Molecular Transport 
equation, transport theory and Phenomena (PE) 
properties of dilute gases, correlation 
function 
Thermodynamic Principles of Self- Fundamentals Fluid-Like Structures and 
Assembly, Interaction Between Lipid Self-Assembling Systems 
Bilayer and Biological Membrane (PE) 
Electronic and optoelectronic polymers, Fundamentals and Organic Molecules, 
small molecules and complexes for technology Complexes and Polymers 
electronic systems for Electronics and 

Optoelectronics (PE) 
 

Microstates of a system, statistical Fundamentals Molecular Thermodynamics 
mechanics and thermodynamics, (PE) 
applications 
Food engineering, preservation, Fundamentals and Food Engineering (PE) 
composition, quality control techniques 
Properties of water molecule, Fundamentals and Molecular Engineering of 
supercritical water, confined and technology Water (PE) 
interfacial water, purification, fuel cells, 
health and medicine 
Intermolecular and Molecule-Surface Fundamentals Modelling of Atoms, 
interactions Molecules and Surfaces (PE) 
 
Structure-property of electronic and Fundamentals and Polymers for Electronics and 
optoelectronic polymers, Technology Optoelectronics I (PE) 
piezoelectricity, applications, PCBs 

5 
 



Molecular dynamics, basics of Monte Fundamentals and Molecular Simulations (PE) 
Carlo method techniques 

Biochemical Basics of Biology, Immobilized enzyme, Fundamentals Biochemical Engineering 
Engineering metabolic pathways, interaction (PE) 

microbial population, bio-separation  
Industrial importance of Technology Bioprocess Technology (PE) 
microorganisms, fermentation, 
industrial production of alcohol, citric 
acid, vinegar etc 
Momentum, heat and mass transfer in Fundamentals Bio-Transport Phenomena 
bio-systems and their analogous (PE) 
behavior 
Separation processes in biochemical Technology Biochemical Separation 
industry, design variables and Processes (PE) 
parameters, processes and methods 
Bioprocess overview, membrane Fundamentals and Bioreactors (PE) 
reactor, bioreactor configuration, techniques 
kinetics, basics of scale-up 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
6 

 



7. Course Categories, credit distribution and Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 

Table 2: Proposed Course Categories and credit distribution in the proposed B.Tech. Programmes 

S. Course Type Course Category  Regular B.Tech. Double B.Tech.  B.Tech. with 
N.   Specialization 

Credit  Total Credit  Total Credit Tot
al 

1 Institute Core Engineering (IE) 34 69 34 59 34 69 
(I) Science (IS) 16 16 16 

 Humanities (IH) 12 9 12 
2 Programme Science (LS) 7 0 7 

Linked (L) 
3 Programme Programme Compulsory 50 71 50 71 50 71 

Core (P) (PC) 
Programme Electives (PE) 18 18 18 
B.Tech. Project (PP) 3 3 3 

4 Open (O) Open Electives (OE) 10 10 0 0 0 0 
5 Engineering Engineering Science/ 0 0 22 22 8 8 

Science  (E) Specialization Core  
Engineering Science/ 0 0 8 8 12 12 
Specialization Elective (EE) 

Total Graded 150  160  160 
6 Non-Graded Humanities (NH) 6 15 6 15 6 15 

(N) Engineering (NE) 3 3 3 

Design/Practical Experience 6 6 6 
(ND)  

Total Graded + Non-Graded   165  175  175 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 



 
 
8. Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 
 
Table 3. Credit Structure for B.Tech. Programmes 

Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact hours Total Credits 
Contact Hours Beyond Contact Total (TC=TH/3) 
(CH) Hours (BCH) Hours 

(TH) 
1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1 
1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 hr 2 hr 3hr 1  
1 hour of Lab/Project 0-0-1 1 hr 0.5 hr 1.5 hr 0.5 

#Contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 



 
 
9. List of Programme Compulsory Courses 
 
Table 4. Programme Compulsory Courses 

Sr. No Course Name LTP Contact Hours Credit 
1 Fluid Mechanics 3-1-0 4 4 
2 Data Structure and Algorithm-CS 3-0-2 5 4 
3 Molecular Engineering 3-0-0 3 3 
4 Material and Energy Balance 3-0-0 3 3 
5 Mass Transfer I 3-0-3 6 4.5 
6 Heat Transfer 3-0-0 3 3 
7 Chemical Reaction Engineering 3-0-3 6 4.5 
8 Scientific Computations 3-0-2 5 4 
9 Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics 3-0-0 3 3 
10 Heat Transfer-Lab 0-0-2 2 1 
11 Mass transfer II 3-0-3 5 4.5 
12 Process Plant Design & Economics 3-0-3 6 4.5 
13 Transport Phenomena 3-1-0 4 4 
14 Process Control and AI Applications 3-0-2 5 4 
15 Fluid Mechanics-Lab  0-0-2 2 1 

Total 52 
  
  

9 
 



 
10. Stream-wise Programme Elective Courses 

 
Table 5. Stream-wise Programme Elective Courses 

Stream S .No Courses L-T-P Credit Course 
Level 

Chemical 1 Industrial Management and Safety for 3-0-0 3 4XX0 
Engineering Chemical Engineers 
Design 2 Product Design in Chemical Engineering 2-0-0 2 4XX0 

3 Unit Operations 3-0-0 3 4XX0 

4 Membrane Technology  3-0-0 3 4XX0 

      

Process 5 Applications of Artificial Intelligence in 3-0-0 3 4XX0 
Engineering Chemical Engineering 
Intelligence 6 Petrochemical Engineering 3-0-0 3 4XX0 
 7 Petroleum Refinery Process Modelling 1-0-2 2 4XX0 

8 Basics of Reliability and Maintainability 3-1-0 4 4XX0 
Engineering for System Safety 

      
Complex fluids 9 Introduction to Complex Fluids  3-0-0 3 4XX0 
and interfacial 10 Interfacial Engineering in Soft Matter  3-0-0 3 4XX0 
engineering 11 Bioprinting 3-0-0 3 4XX0 

12 3-D Printing: Material Processing and 3-0-0 3 4XX0 
Properties  

13 Introductory Principles in Polymer 3-0-0 3 4XX0 
Engineering 

      
Sustainability 14 Solid Waste Management 3-0-0 3 4XX0 

15 Air Pollution Control technology 3-0-0 3 4XX0 
16 Processing of Rare-earth and Radioactive 3-0-0 3 4XX0 

Materials 

17 Energy Resources  3-0-0 3 4XX0 
18 Waste Water Treatment 3-0-0 3 4XX0 

      
Molecular 19 Molecular Transport Phenomena 2-0-0 2 4XX0 
Engineering 20 Fluid-Like Structures and Self-Assembling 2-0-0 2 4XX0 

Systems 
21 Organic Molecules, Complexes and 3-0-0 3 4XX0 

Polymers for Electronics and 
Optoelectronics  

22 Molecular Thermodynamics 3-0-0 3 4XX0 
      

Biochemical 23 Biochemical Engineering 3-0-0 3 4XX0 
Engineering 24 Bioprocess Technology 3-0-0 3 4XX0 

25 Bio-Transport Phenomena 2-0-0 2 4XX0 
26 Biochemical Separation Processes 2-0-0 2 4XX0 
27 Bioreactors 3-0-0 3 4XX0 

 

10 
 



 
Mini-Project(0-0-6) 
Program elective component for 8th semester 
 
 
Design/Practical Experience (ND) 
Options: Three Summer Design Projects (0-0-4) for 2 Credits each or in regular semesters.   
  

11 
 



11. Specializations to be offered by the Department: 
 
Table 6: Specialization and courses 

S.No. Name of Specialization Core (8 credits)  Specialization Elective (12 Credits)  
specialization 

1 Process Applications of 3-0-0 4XX0 Basics of Reliability 3-1-0 4XX0 
Engineering Artificial and Maintainability 
Intelligence Intelligence in Engineering for System 

Chemical Safety 
Engineering 
Petroleum 1-0-2 4XX0 Chemometrics 3-0-0 7XX0 
Refinery Process 
Modelling 
Petrochemical 3-0-0 4XX0 Artificial Intelligence in 3-0-2 7XX0 
Engineering Chemical Reactor 

Control 
   Nanosensors 3-0-0 7XX0 

   Data Analytics in 2-0-2 7XX0 
Process Modelling and 
Simulation 

   Artificial Intelligence-1 3-0-0 7XX0 

   Machine Learning-1 3-0-0 7XX0 

   Introduction to Internet 1-0-0 7XX0 
of Things (IoT) 

   Sensors and IoT Lab 0-0-2 7XX0 

   Industry 1-0-0 7XX0 
4.0Applications in 
Manufacturing Systems 

   Specialization focused 0-0-6 4XX0 
Mini Project 

   Specialization focused 0-0-4 4XX0 
Design & practical 
experience 

   Specialization focused 0-0-2 4XX0 
research review 

2 Sustainability Solid Waste 3-0-0 4XX0 Air Pollution Control 3-0-0 4XX0 
Management technology 
Waste Water 3-0-0 4XX0 Energy Resources  3-0-0 4XX0 
Treatment 
Ocean Thermal 1-0-0 7XX0 Catalysis for Energy 3-0-0 6XX0 
Energy (CY) 
Conversion 
Microfluidic Fuel 1-0-0 7XX0 Membrane Technology  3-0-0 4XX0 
Cell 
   Unit Operations 3-0-0 4XX0 

   Processing of Rare- 3-0-0 4XX0 
earth and Radioactive 
Materials 

12 
 



   Advanced Waste Water 3-0-2 7XX0 
Treatment 

   Environmental Impact 3-0-0 7XX0 
Assessment (EIA) 

   Hydrogen & Methanol 3-0-0 7XX0 
Economy 

   Specialization focused 0-0-6 4XX0 
Mini Project 

   Specialization focused 0-0-4 4XX0 
Design & practical 
experience 

   Specialization focused 0-0-2 4XX0 
research review 

3 Molecular Molecular 2-0-0 4XX0 Organic Molecules, 3-0-0 4XX0 
Engineering Transport Complexes and 

Phenomena Polymers for 
Electronics and 
Optoelectronics  

Introduction to 3-0-0 4XX0 Introductory Principles 3-0-0 4XX0 
Complex Fluids in Polymer Engineering 
Interfacial 3-0-0 4XX0 Molecular 3-0-0 4XX0 
Engineering in Thermodynamics 
Soft Matter 
   Fluid-Like Structures 2-0-0 4XX0 

and Self-Assembling 
Systems 

   Molecular Engineering 1-0-0 7XX0 
of Water 

   Polymers for 2-0-0 7XX0 
Electronics and 
Optoelectronics 

   Molecular Simulations 2-0-0 7XX0 

   Food Engineering 3-0-0 7XX0 

   Modelling of Atoms, 3-0-0 7XX0 
Molecules and Surfaces 

   Specialization focused 0-0-6 4XX0 
Mini Project 

   Specialization focused 0-0-4 4XX0 
Design & practical 
experience 

   Specialization focused 0-0-2 4XX0 
research review 

 
  

13 
 



12. Curriculum of B.Tech. Chemical Engineering (Regular) 
 

     Table 7. Curriculum of B.Tech. in Chemical Engineering 
I Semester II Semester   
Cat Course LTP CH NC GC Cat Course LTP CH NC GC 
IE Engineering 2-1-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 

Mechanics Electrical 
Engineering 

IS Chemistry  3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Computer Science 

IS Physics  3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Bioengineering 

IS Chemistry Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1       
IS Physics Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1       
IS Mathematics I  3-1-0 4 - 4 IS Mathematics II 3-1-0 4 - 4 
IE Engineering 0-0-2 2 - 1 IE Engineering 0-0-2 1 - 1 

Visualization Realization 
NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - 

Design I  Design II  
NH Communicatio 0-0-2 2 1 - NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - 

n Skill I  Skill II  
NH Social Connect 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Social Connect 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 

and and 
responsibilities responsibilities II 
I 

NH Performing 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Performing Arts 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 
Arts I /Sports II/Sports II 
I  

Total 11-2- 25 3 16 Total 12-1- 27 3 17 
12 14 

III Semester IV Semester 
Cat Course LTP CH NC GC Cat Course LTP CH NC GC 

LS Probability, 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Materials 3 ×  3 - 3 
Statistics & Fractals: Polymer, 1-0-0    
Stochastic Corrosion, 
Process Colloids & 

suspensions 
IE Thermodynam 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Signals & 3-1-0 4 4 - 

ics Systems 
PC Fluid 3-1-0 4 - 4 Data Structure 

PC 3-0-2 5  4 
Mechanics and Algorithm  

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 PC Molecular 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Machine Engineering  
Learning 

LS Physics of 3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Material and 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Complex Energy Balance 
Fluids 

NE Intro. To 0-0-2 2 1  IH Humanities 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Profession  

Total 15-3- 22 1 19 Total 18-1-2 21 - 20 
4 

14 
 



V Semester VI Semester 
Cat Course LTP CH N GC Cat Course LTP CH NC GC 

C 
Mass Transfer      

PC 3-0-3 6 4.5 PC Mass transfer II 
I - 3-0-3 6 - 4.5 

PC Heat Transfer 3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Process Plant 3-0-3 6 - 4.5 
Design & 
Economics 

PC Chemical 3-0-3 6 - 4.5 Transport 3-1-0 4 - 4 
Reaction  PC Phenomena 
Engineering   

PC Scientific 3-0-2  5 - 4 PC Process Control 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Computations and AI 

Applications 
PC Chemical 3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Fluid Mechanics- 0-0-2 2 1  

Engineering Lab  
Thermodynam
ics 

PC Heat Transfer 0-0-2 2 - 1 PE Programme 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Lab Elective-1 

IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3 NH Professional 0-1-0 1 1 - 
Ethics II 

Professional 0-1-0 1 1 -       
NH 

Ethics I 
Total 18-1- 29 1 23 Total 15-2- 27 1 21 

10 10 
VII Semester VIII Semester 
Cat Course LTP CH NC GC Cat Course LTP CH NC GC 
PP B. Tech. 0-0-6 6 - 3 IH Humanities IV 3-0-0 3 - 3 

Project  
PE Programme 3-0-0 3 - 3 PE Programme 3-0-0 3 - 3 

Elective-2 Elective-4 
PE Programme 3-0-0 3 3  PE Programme 2-0-0 2 2  

Elective-3 Elective-5 
OE Open Elective- 3-0-0 3 3  PE Programme 2-0-0 2 2  

1 Elective-6 
IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3 OE Open Elective-2 3-1-0 4 4  
IS Environmental 2-0-0 2 - 2 OE Open Elective-3 3-0-0 3 3  

Science 
Total 14-0- 20 - 17 Total 16-1-0 17 - 17 

6 
Total of Non-graded and Graded Credit respectively  9 150 

Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 
Grand Total  15 165 

 
  

15 
 



13. Curriculum of Double B.Tech. : B.Tech. Chemical Engineering and Engineering Science 
 
Table 8. Programme structure of Double B.Tech. 

I Semester II Semester 
Cat Course LTP CH NC GC Cat Course LTP CH NC GC 
IE Engineering 2-1-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 

Mechanics Electrical 
Engineering 

IS Chemistry  3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Computer 
Science 

IS Physics  3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Bioengineering 

IS Chemistry Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1       
IS Physics Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1       
IS Mathematics I  3-1-0 4 - 4 IS Mathematics II 3-1-0 4 - 4 
IE Engineering 0-0-2 2 - 1 IE Engineering 0-0-2 1 - 1 

Visualization Realization 
NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - 

Design I  Design II  
NH Communicatio 0-0-2 2 1 - NH Communicatio 0-0-2 2 1 - 

n Skill I  n Skill II  
NH Social Connect 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Social Connect 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 

and and 
responsibilities responsibilities 
I II 

NH Performing 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Performing 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 
Arts I /Sports I  Arts II/Sports 

II 
Total 11-2- 25 3 16 Total 12-1- 27 3 17 

12 14 
III Semester IV Semester 
Cat Course LTP CH NC GC Cat Course LTP CH NC GC 
ES Probability and 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Materials 3 ×  3 - 3 

Statistics Science & 1-0-0    
Engineerin
g  

ES Modern 3-0-0 3 - 3 ES Embedded 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Physics Systems 

and IoT 
IE Thermodynami 3-1-0 4 - 4 ES Data 3-0-2 5 - 4 

cs Structure 
and 
Algorithm 

IE Signals and 3-1-0 4 - 4 ES Design of 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Systems Experiment

s  
IE Machine 3-0-2 5 - 4 ES Modelling 3-0-2 5 - 4 

Learning and 
Simulation 

16 
 



NE Intro. To 0-0-2 2 1 IH Humanities 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Profession  I 

Total 15-3- 22 1 19 Total 18-0-6 24 - 21 
4 

V Semester VI Semester 
Cat Course LTP CH NC GC Cat Course LTP CH NC GC 

     
PC Mass Transfer I 3-0-3 6 4.5 PC Mass transfer II 

- 3-0-3 6 - 4.5 
PC Heat Transfer 3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Process Plant 3-0-3 6 - 4.5 

Design & 
Economics 

PC Chemical 3-0-3 6 - 4.5 Transport 3-1-0 4 - 4 
Reaction  PC Phenomena 
Engineering   

PC Fluid 3-1-0 4 - 4 Process Control 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Mechanics PC and AI 

Applications 
PC Chemical 3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Fluid 0-0-2 2 1 

Engineering Mechanics-Lab  
Thermodynami
cs 

PC Heat Transfer 0-0-2 2 - 1 PC Material and 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Lab Energy Balance 

IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3 PE Programme 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Elective-1 

Professional 0-1-0 1 1 - NH Professional 0-1-0 1 1 - 
NH 

Ethics I Ethics II 
Total 17-3- 28 1 23 Total 18-2- 30 1 24 

8 10 
VII Semester VIII Semester 
Cat Course LTP CH NC GC Cat Course LTP CH NC GC 
PP B. Tech. Project  0-0-6 6 - 3 PE/ Programme/E 14-0- 14 - 14 

ES ngineering 0 
Science 
Electives 

PC Scientific    PC Molecular 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Computations 3-0-2 4 - 4 Engineering 

PE/ Programme/ 11-0- 11 - 11 IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3 
OE Engineering 0 

Science 
Elective-2 

IS Environmental 2-0-0 2 - 2       
Science 

Total 16-1- 23 - 20 Total 20-0- 20 - 20 
6 0 

Total of Non-Graded and Graded Credits respectively    9 160 
Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 

Grand Total  15 175 

 
 
 

17 
 



14. Detailed Course Content of Programme Compulsory Courses 
 

Title Fluid Mechanics  Number  MEL2XX0/ CHL2XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering/ Chemical L-T-P [C] 3–1–0 [4] 

Engineering 
Offered for B.Tech (ME, CH) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The instructor will 
1. To inculcate the fundamental laws governing fluid flow 
2. Help the students to understand the importance and application of fluid mechanics. 
3. To exemplify concepts of similarity and model testing 

 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply fundamental knowledge in modelling and analysis of fluid flow problems in engineering 
2. Interpret data from experiments of fluid flows and solve using differential equations and charts 

 
Contents 
Introduction [2 Lecture]: Definition and properties, continuum approach, types of fluids, basics of vector calculus 
and index notations. 
Fluid statics [4 Lectures]: Basic equations, Manometry, hydrostatic force on submerged bodies, rigid body motion.  
Integral analysis of fluid flow [4 Lectures]:  Reynolds transport theorem, conservation equations.  
Differential analysis [5 Lectures]: Kinematics of fluids - Deformations in fluid particle, strain rate, vorticity, stream 
function, potential function, streamlines, pathlines, streaklines, derivation of Navier-Stokes equations. 
Incompressible Inviscid flow [6 Lectures]: Euler’s equation, Bernoulli’s equation, elementary potential flows, 
superposition of elementary flows. Vorticity and vortex flows 
Internal Incompressible Viscous flow [4 Lectures]: Hagen-Poiseuille and Couette flows, skin friction and loss 
coefficients, venturimeter, orifice meter and Pitot tube. 
External Incompressible Viscous flow [5 Lecture]: Boundary layer over flat plate, boundary layer thickness, 
Prandtl-boundary layer equations, momentum integral equation, adverse pressure gradient & separation, drag 
coefficients.  
Dimensional analysis and similarity [2 Lectures]: Buckingham Pi theorem and examples. 
Introduction to Turbulent flows [3 Lectures]: Decomposition of instantaneous velocities, time-averaged continuity 
and Navier-Stokes equations, Reynolds stresses, turbulent viscosity.  
Basics of Compressible flow [3 Lectures]: Acoustic waves, isentropic equations, concept of shock waves  
Few Industrial Applications [4 Lectures]: Pipe networks, Flow past immersed objects, Agitation and Mixing.  
 
Text Book 
1. Fox, R. W., Pitchard, P. J and McDonald, A. T., (2010), Introduction to Fluid Mechanics, 7thEdition, John Wiley 

& Sons Inc. 
2. Munson, B. R., Rothmayer, A. P., Okiishi, T’H., and Huebsch, W. W. Fundamentals of Fluid Mechanics, 7th 

Edition, John Wiley and Sons 
3. Kundu, P. K, Cohen, I. M and Dowling, D. R, Fluid Mechanics, 6th Edn., Associated Press.  
4. McCabe, W.L., Smith, J.C., Harriott, P., (2005), Unit Operations of Chemical Engineering, 7th edition, McGraw-

Hill International edition.  

Reference Books 
1. White, F. M.,(2003), Fluid Mechanics, 5thEdition,  McGraw-Hil 
2. Cimbala, J.M. and Cengel, Y.A., (2010), Fluid Mechanics: Fundamentals and Applications, McGraw-Hill  
3. Bird. R. B., Stewart, W. E. and Lightfoot, E. N., 2006, Transport Phenomena, 2nd edition, John Wiley & Sons. 

4. Panton, Ronald L - Incompressible flow, John Wiley & Sons, 2006. Third edition is available from Wiley Student 
Edition 

 

18 
 



Self-Learning Material  
1. S. Chakrabarty, Introduction to Fluid Mechanics, NPTEL Course Material, Mechanical Engineering, IIT 

Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/105/112105269/ 
2. V.Shankar, Fluid Mechanics, NPTEL Course Material, Chemical Engineering, IIT Kanpur,  

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/104/103104044/# 

 
  

19 
 



Course Title Data Structures and Algorithms Course No. CSxxx 

Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 

Offered for B.Tech of all branches Type PC 
Prerequisite Introduction to Computer Programming   

Objectives 
1. To introduce and practice the implementation of various data structures used for indexing, searching, and 

sorting operations.  
2. To introduce basic mathematical techniques for algorithm analysis and design.  

 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to design and implement appropriate data structures for indexing, searching, and sorting operations for 

real-world problems. 
2. Designing of new algorithms using standard data structures. 
3. Analyzing the time and space complexities of standard data structures and basic algorithms.  

 
Contents  
Algorithm analysis and complexity: Big/little -Oh, Omega, Theta notation, Recurrence equations [2 Lectures]  
Abstract data types: Linear data structures, Tree, Binary trees, Tree traversal, Applications [7 Lectures]  
Search trees: Binary search trees, Balanced search trees, AVL trees, B-Trees [5 Lectures]  
Heaps: Binary Heap, Heap order property and min/max heaps [3 Lectures]  
Sets: Disjoint set ADT, Basic operations on Sets, Union/Find Algorithm [2 Lectures]  
Sorting algorithms: Bubble sort, Selection sort, Bucket sort, Insertion sort, Overview of Divide-and-conquer, Quick 
sort, Merge sort [6 Lectures]  
Hashing: Hash tables and operations, Hash function, Open and closed hashing, External and internal hashing, 
Collision resolving methods, Rehashing [5 Lectures)]  
Graph algorithms: Definitions, Branch and bound, Backtracking, Representation, Traversal, Shortest-path 
algorithms, Minimum Spanning Tree algorithm, Topological sorting [8 Lectures]  
Greedy techniques and Dynamic programming [4 Lectures]  
 
Laboratory 
1. Implementation of data structures using C programming language.  
2. Practically verifying and comparing run-time performance and asymptotic behavior of various data structures 

and related algorithms.  
3. Applications of data structures from real-life scenarios.  

 
Text Book 
M. A. WEISS (2002), Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C, Addison-Wesley, 2nd Edition. 
 
Reference Book  
T. H. CORMEN, C. E. LEISERSON, R.L. RIVEST, C. STEIN (2009), Introduction to Algorithms, MIT Press, 3rd 
Edition. 

 
  

20 
 



Title Molecular Engineering Number CHL2XX0 
Department Department of Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for BTech Type PC 
Prerequisite None   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide background about the basic concepts of molecular engineering, biomolecules and their structure, sensors 
that are used for the detection and principles of recognition along with overview of relevant manufacturing 
processes and applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Gain an overview of overall molecular engineering starting from biomolecules to manufacturing processes and 

applications. 
2. This course will enable and motivate scholars to pursue higher-level courses in focused areas. 

 
Contents  
Introduction to Molecular Engineering: [10 lectures] Scope of molecular engineering (1lecture), building blocks of 
molecular engineering (Monosaccharides, amino acids, nucleic acids, synthetic monomer, macrocyclic molecules, 
metal chelates and cluster) (5 lectures), Redox unit and reactive functional groups, chromophore and fluorophore 
(4 lectures), 

Approaches in Molecular Engineering: [16 lectures] Chemical conjugation, Chemical polymerization (4 lectures), 
enzymatic modification, molecular self-assembly (4 lectures), methods of recognition for chemical and 
biomolecules (4 lectures), Nanomaterials and Polymers in Chemical Sensors (4 lectures) 

Molecular Engineering Applications for Chemical Engineering: [16] Chemical sensor technology, Definition of 
chemical sensors, application of chemical sensors (5 lectures), hydrogels, encapsulation, polymer membranes (4 
lectures), micro fabrication methods, existing molecular diagnostic devices, wearable sensors, Catalysis(5 
lectures), downstream processing (affinity purification, product modification, membrane technology)(2 lectures) 

 
Textbook  
Banica F.G,(2012) Chemical Sensors and Biosensors: Fundamentals and applications, 1st ed., Wiley 
 
Reference Books  
1. Nielsen M .B., (2014), Organic Synthesis and Molecular Engineering, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
2. Malhotra B.D., Pandey C.M., (2017), Biosensors: Fundamentals and applications, Smithers, Rapra  

 
Online Course Material 
Pandya H.J., Fabrication Techniques for MEMs-based sensors: Clinical perspective, NPTEL Course Material, 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Science Bangalore, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108108113/# 

 
  

21 
 



Title Material and Energy Balance Number CHL2XX0 

Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for BTech Type PC 

Prerequisite None   

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide the basics of material and energy balances for Chemical Engineers. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1. Gain basic understanding of material and energy balances. 
2. Gain knowledge of applying the material and energy balances to Chemical Engineering Systems. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Units and dimensions in chemical engineering (1 lecture), stoichiometric and composition relations 
(1.5 lectures), concept of degrees of freedom and linear dependence of a set of equations (1.5 lectures). [4 lectures] 
 
Material Balance: Selection of a basis, conservation of mass/atom material balance for systems with and without 
chemical reactions, material balance involving gases (5 lectures), vapors, liquids and solids and uses of real gas 
relationships, vapor-liquid equilibrium and concept of humidity and saturation (5 lectures); Analysis of systems 
with bypass, recycle and purge; Analysis of processes involving condensation, crystallization and vaporization (4 
lectures). [14 lectures] 
 
Energy Balance : Conservation of energy with reference to general energy balance with and without chemical 
reactions, chemical engineering problems involving reversible processes and mechanical energy balance (5 
lectures), calculations of heat of change of phase (solid – liquid and liquid – vapor), heat of reaction, heat of 
combustion, heat of solutions and mixing (5 lectures), determination of temperatures for adiabatic and non-
adiabatic reactions, use of psychrometric and enthalpy concentration diagrams(4 lectures). [14 lectures] 
 
Simultaneous Material and Energy Balances: Degrees of freedom analysis for multicomponent systems (3 
lectures), combined steady state material and energy balances for units with multiple sub-systems (3 lectures). [6 
lectures] 
 
Unsteady State Material and Energy Balances: Transient material and energy balances with and without chemical 
reactions. [4 lectures] 
 
Textbook  
1. Himmelblau D.M., Riggs, J.B. (2015), Basic Principles and Calculations in Chemical Engineering, 8th Ed., Prentice 

India Education Services. 
2. Bhat, B.I., Vora, S.M., (2004), Stoichiometry, 4th Ed., Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd.  
 
Reference Books  
1. Narayanan K.V. and Lakshmikutty B., (2006), Stoichiometry and Process Calculations, Prentice Hall of India. 
2. Felder R.M. and Rousseau R.W., (2005), Elementary Principles of Chemical Processes, 3rd Ed., John Wiley & 

Sons. 
3. O.A. Hougen, K.M. Watson and R.A. Ragatz, 2004, Chemical Process Principles Part 1, 2nd Edition, CBS 

Publishers and Distributors. 
 
Online Course Material 
Majumdar S.K., Basic Principles and Calculations in Chemical Engineering, SWAYAM Course Material, 
Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
https://swayam.gov.in/nd1_noc20_ch20 

 
  

22 
 



Title Mass Transfer I Number CHL3XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-3 [4.5] 
Offered for BTech Type PC 
Prerequisite None   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Share basic concepts of mass transfer operation, definitions and overview of equipment. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
Gain basic understanding of the mass transfer operations and its industrial applications. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Mass Transfer: [8 lecture] Overview with examples and definitions, Fick’s Law (1st law), steady 
state molecular diffusion for fluids in laminar flow, diffusivity of gases and liquids (5 lectures), applications of 
molecular diffusion, method of separation, penetration and surface renewal theories (3 lectures) 
Direct Contact Mass Transfer Operations for Immiscible Phases: [10 lectures] Equilibrium, diffusion between two 
insoluble phases, ideal stage, local diffusion, overall diffusion (4 lectures), material balance in co-current processes; 
counter-current processes; stage-wise processes; continuous and batch processes (4 lectures), minimum stages for 
total reflux (2 lectures).  
Gas-Liquid Mass Transfer: [8 lectures] Bubble columns, multi-stage absorption, tray efficiency, NTU (Number of 
Transfer Units) (4 lectures), HTU (Height of Transfer Unit), wetted-wall towers, tray towers, packed towers, Ergun 
equation, end effects and axial mixing, q-line location (4 lectures).  
Special Cases in Gas-Liquid Mass Transfer: [12 lectures] Liquid-vapor equilibrium (1 lecture), vapor pressure 
curve, triple point, critical point, Clausius-Clapeyron equation, absolute humidity, saturation, humidification, dry-
bulb temperature, dew point, psychrometric charts, wet-bulb temperature, the Lewis relation (5 lectures), 
distillation - Pressure-Temperature-Concentration phase diagram for binary systems, constant pressure and 
constant temperature equilibria (4 lectures), relative volatility, Raoult’s law, azeotropes, enthalpy concentration 
diagrams (2lectures).  
Liquid-Extraction (Solvent Extraction) & Solid-Fluid Operations: [4 lectures] Basics Definitions including feed, 
solvent, extract, raffinate (2 lectures); liquid-liquid equilibria, the mixture rule, effect of temperature and pressure, 
three liquid systems (2 lectures).  
 
Laboratory Experiments 
Experiments on mass transfer such as  
Diffusivity in gases, diffusivity in liquids (3 experiments) 
Absorption such as packed bed tower/ plate column (4 experiments) 
Distillation (3 experiments) 
 
Textbook 
1. Treybal R.E. (2017) Mass Transfer Operation, 3rd Ed., McGraw Hill Education, New Delhi. 
2. Dutta, B.K. (2007) Principles of Mass Transfer and Separation Processes, 2nd edition, Prentice Hall of India 

 
Reference Books 
McCabe W.L., Smith J.C. and Harriott P. (2017), Unit Operations of Chemical Engineering, 7th Ed., McGraw Hill 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Majumdor S.K. and Das C., Mass Transfer Operations I, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemical 

Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103103035/ 
2. Mandal B., Mass Transfer Operations I, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian 

Institute of Technology Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/103/103103145/ 
 
 
 

23 
 



Title Heat Transfer Number  MEL3XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 
Prerequisite Basics of Thermodynamics & Fluid Mechanics   
Objectives 
1. To inculcate understanding, formulation, designing and solving problems with concepts in conduction, 

convection and radiation 
2. To explain design concepts of fins, heat exchangers 
3. To introduce physical background associated with empirical correlations for heat transfer coefficients using 

real world problems 
 

Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Analyze empirical situation of steady and transient conduction heat transfer 
2. Evaluate transfer coefficients in natural and forced convection in and out of control areas 
3. Assess performance of various heat exchangers 
4. Solve numerical problems related to conduction and radiation heat transfer 

 
Contents 
Introduction (1 Lectures): Modes of heat transfer, Fourier’s law, conductivity, diffusivity 
Introduction to Heat conduction (3 Lectures): General heat conduction equations, 1D Heat conduction, Boundary 
and initial conditions, Heat generation 
Steady   heat   conduction (4 Lectures): Heat   conduction   in  plane  wall, cylinder, sphere,   network analysis, 
critical radius of insulation, heat transfer from fins  
Transient heat conduction (4 Lectures): Lumped system analysis, transient heat conduction in large plane walls, 
long cylinders and sphere with spatial effect, Heisler and Grober charts  
Numerical methods of heat conduction (2 Lectures): Finite difference formulation, numerical methods for 1D and 
2D steady state heat conduction 
 
Introduction   to   convection (4 Lectures): Velocity   and thermal boundary layer, laminar, turbulent flows, solution 
of boundary layer equations, Non-dimensional numbers  
External heat transfer (4 Lectures): Drag and heat transfer, parallel flow over flat plates, flow across cylinders and 
spheres  
Internal heat transfer (4 Lectures): Mean Velocity and Temperature, Critical Reynolds number, The entrance 
regions, Hydrodynamic and thermal entry lengths, fully developed flow 
Natural/free convection (2 Lectures): Physical Mechanism, Natural convection over surfaces, Criteria for forced 
and natural convection 
 
Boiling and condensation (3 Lectures): Boiling Curve, Nucleate boiling, film boiling, Dropwise and film 
condensation, Nusselt’s theory of film condensation  
Heat Exchangers (4 Lectures): Classifications, Overall Heat Transfer Coefficient, LMTD, Effectiveness-NTU 
method, Operation Issues, Introduction to Design of Heat Exchanger   
Introduction to radiation (4 Lectures): Physical Mechanism, Radiations laws, Intensity of Radiation, gray body 
View factors (3 Lectures): View Factor Integral for diffuse surfaces, Radiation exchange, Electric Circuit Analogy 
 
Text Book 
1. Incropera, F.  P.  & Dewitt, D. P., (2011), Fundamental  of  Heat  and  Mass  Transfer, John Wiley & Sons 
2. Cengel, Y. A. & Ghajar, A. J.,(2008),Heat and Mass Transfer, McGraw Hill 

 
Reference Books 
Holman J.P., Heat Transfer, Tata McGraw-Hill Edition, New Delhi  

 
Self-Learning Material  
 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qa-PQOjS3zA&list=PL5F4F46C1983C6785 

24 
 



Title Chemical Reaction Engineering Number CHLP3XX0 

Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P  [C] 3-0-3 [4.5] 

Offered for B.Tech.  Type PC 

Prerequisite None   

Objective 
The Instructor will: 
Introduce basic concepts of reaction kinetics and chemical reactors. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Have fair understanding of basic concepts of chemical engineering reaction kinetics and chemical reactors. 
2. Design and operate a chemical reactor. 

 
Contents 
Introduction: [4 lectures] General understanding and background, Definition of rate of reaction, Concepts of rate 
equations, stoichiometry and rate laws, types of reactors, industrial reactions and reactors.  
Reaction kinetics: [10 lectures] Determination of kinetic parameters, Interpretation of data, design equation using 
batch- and semi batch- reactors (5 lectures), CSTR, PFR and recycle reactor, auto catalytic reactions, reactor choice 
for single reaction, Reactor design for ideal flow reactors (5 lectures).  
Design for Multiple Reactions: [6 lectures] Parallel and series reactions, analysis of product distribution and 
determination of reactor size (3 lectures), selectivity and yield factors, Denbigh reactions, reactor choice for 
multiple reactions (3 lectures).  
Reactor design and operation: [14 lectures] Isothermal and non-Isothermal design of ideal reactors, tubular reactor, 
auto-thermal process (5 lectures), CSTR, first order reversible reaction, Residence time distribution (RTD) theory, 
role of RTD in reactor behavior (5 lectures), age distribution (E) of fluid, relationship between E and F curve; non-
ideal flow (4 lectures).  
Catalytic reaction: [8 lectures] Rate controlling steps, intra- and inter- particle mass transfer, Thiele modulus and 
effectiveness factor, performance equations (4 lectures), product distribution in multiple reactions, Unreacted core 
model for spherical particles, rate of reaction, rate-controlling step determination (4 lectures).  
 
Laboratory Experiments 
1. Residence Time Distribution (3 h) 
2. Kinetics of reaction (3h) such as condensation polymerization etc. 
3. Batch reactor (6h)  
4. Flow Reactors (18 h) 
     CSTR 
     PFR 
     Tubular  
5. Catalysis (3h) 
6. Half-life method analysis of kinetic data (3h) 
7. Batch reactive distillation (6h) 
 
Text Books 
1. Fogler H. S., (2006), Elements of Chemical Reaction Engineering, 4th Ed., Pearson-Prentice Hall. 
2. Levenspiel O., (2000), Chemical Reaction Engineering, 3rd Ed., John Wiley and Sons. 

 
Reference Books 
Schmidt L. D., (2005), The Engineering of Chemical Reactions, 2nd Ed., Oxford University Press. 
 
Online Course Material  
Mandal, B., CHEMICAL REACTION ENGINEERING – I, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemical 
Engineering IIT Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/103/103103153/ 
 

25 
 



Title Scientific Computations Number MAL2XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech ME, MT, CHE Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Demonstrate the validity and error in the numerical results  
2. Explain numerical techniques for a variety of problems  
3. Introduce how to solve numerically algebraic equations, linear systems of equations, approximation and 

ordinary differential equations. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Develop an understanding of numerical error and applicability of a particular method.  
2. Solve numerically algebraic equations, linear systems of equations and ordinary differential equations.  
3. Carry out numerical interpolation, differentiation and integration. 

 
Contents 
Errors in computation [2 Lecture]: Numerical Algorithms and errors, source and types of errors, error propagation, 
floating point representation, rounding error and floating point arithmetic.   

Roots of equation [8 Lecture]: Iterative methods, order of convergence, Iterative methods for roots of nonlinear 
system of equations. 

Linear systems of equations [8 Lecture]: Direct and iterative methods (Jacobi, Gauss Seidel), rate of convergence of 
iterative methods, Condition number, Power and inverse power methods for eigenvalue problems, matrix 
factorization schemes (LU, QR, spectral, Schur, polar, SVD). 

Interpolation [7 Lecture]: Lagrange, Newton divided difference formula, Newton’s interpolations, errors in 
interpolation. 

Differentiation and Integration [7 Lecture]: Differentiation using interpolation formulas, Integration using 
interpolation, Newton-Cotes formulas, Gauss quadrature rules. 

Ordinary differential equations [4 Lecture]: Taylor series method, Euler’s Method, Modified Euler’s Methods, 
multistep methods, Runge-Kutta Methods. 

Advanced methods for Differential Equations [6 Lecture]: Adaptive methods, BVP finite difference methods and 
their extension to PDEs, introduction to parallel computation. 
 
Textbook 
1. S.S. Sastry, (2012) Introductory Methods of Numerical Analysis, PHI Learning. 
2. E. Kreyszig, (2010) Advanced Engineering Mathematics, Wiley. 
3. S.C. Chapra, (2008) Applied Numerical Methods with MATLAB for Engineers and Scientists, McGraw-Hill. 
4. Golub, G.H., and Loan, C.F.V., (2000) Matrix Computation, JHU Press. 
5. Santosh Kumar Gupta, 2012, Numerical Methods for Engineers, New Academic Sciences. 
Reference Books 
1. R.L. Burden and J.D. Faires, (2011) Numerical Analysis, Cengage Learning. 
2. J.H Mathews and K.D. Fink, (2006) Numerical Methods using Matlab, Pearson Education. 
3. R. Süli and D.F. Mayers, (2003) Introduction to Numerical Analysis, Cambridge University Press. 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Lal, R. and Banerjee S., Numerical Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Roorkee, 

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107062/  
2. Usha, R., Numerical Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Mathematics, IIT Madras, 

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106101/ 
 

26 
 



Title Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics Number CHL3XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for BTech Type PC 
Prerequisite None   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide background of basic concepts in thermodynamics for chemical engineers such as fugacity, activity 

coefficient, vapor-liquid equilibrium and reaction equilibrium while focusing on thermodynamics of fluids, 
equilibria and processes 

 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1.  Gain understanding of thermodynamic aspects relevant to chemical engineering 
2.  Learn about the importance of thermodynamics for mixing, equilibria and processes 
 
Contents 
Review : Laws of thermodynamics, PVT behaviour of fluids, Gibb’s phase rule, cubic equations of state and 
generalized correlations. [2 lectures] 
Vapor-liquid equilibrium (VLE): Phase rule, simple models for VLE, VLE by modified Raoult’s law(4 lectures), 
VLE from K-value correlations, Flash calculations(2 lectures). [6 lectures] 
Solution Thermodynamics: Fundamental property relationships (1 lecture), free energy and chemical potential (1 
lecture), partial properties, definition of fugacity and fugacity coefficient of pure species and species in solution (4 
lectures), the ideal solution and excess properties (3 lectures). [9 lectures] 
Liquid phase properties from VLE: Models for excess Gibbs energy, heat effects and property change on mixing [5 
lectures] 
Liquid-Liquid Equilibria: Vapor-Liquid-Liquid Equilibria (2 lectures); Solid-Liquid Equilibria (2 lectures); Solid-
Gas Equilibria (2 lectures) [6 lectures] 
Chemical reaction equilibria: Equilibrium criterion, equilibrium constant, evaluation of equilibrium constant at 
different temperatures (3 lectures), equilibrium conversion of single reactions, multireaction equilibria (4 lectures). 
[7 lectures] 
Thermodynamic Analysis of Processes: Work and free energy, availability (2 lectures), analysis of mixing, 
separation processes (3 lectures), heat exchange, lost work calculations (2 lectures). [7 lectures] 

 
Textbook 
Smith J.M., Van Ness H.C. and Abbott M.M., (2005), Introduction to Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics, 7th 
Ed., McGraw Hill. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Rao, Y.V.C., (1997), Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics, University Press, Hyderabad. 
2. Koretsky M.D., (2004), Engineering and Chemical Thermodynamics, John Wiley & sons.  
3. Kyle B.G., (1999), Chemical and Process Thermodynamics, 3rd ed., Prentice Hall. 
4. Sandler S.I. (2006), Chemical, Biochemical and Engineering Thermodynamics, 4th Ed., John Wiley & Sons. 
 
Online Course Material 
Ananth M.S., Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemical 
Engineering, IIT Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103106070/ 
       

 
  

27 
 



Title Heat Transfer Lab Number  MEP3XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 
Prerequisite Heat and Mass Transfer   
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Provide the practical knowledge with regard to the determination of rate of heat exchange in various modes of 

heat transfer 
2. Provide practical exposure to various temperature measurement instruments and its working principle 

 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Compare the performance of different convection processes  
2. Measure the heat transfer properties of various metals 
3. Understand basic laws of radiation heat transfer  
4. Measure the temperature of objects using different temperature measurement instruments 

 
Contents 
1. Study on Temperature distribution during 1-D heat transfer in (a) Plain Wall (b) Cylinder (C) Sphere. (2 week) 
2. Measurement of Thermal Conductivity of unknown material. (1 week) 
3. Effect of Size of Plain wall on Temperature distribution and contact resistance. (1 week) 
4. Demonstration of domestic solar water heating system (Time vs Temperature plots). (1 week) 
5. Investigation of the influence of solar luminous intensity, the water flow rate and the angle of incidence of the 

light on the efficiency and temperature difference. (1 week) 
6. Study on forced and free convection heat transfer for flow over flat plate, Tube bundle and Fins. (1 week) 
7. Testing the accuracy and time response of different temperature sensors (PT100, NTC, Thermocouple, Mercury 

Thermometer, Gas Pressure Thermometer, Bimetallic Thermometer). (1 week) 
8. Calibration of PT100 temperature sensor and derive equation of temperature as function of resistance. (1 week) 
9. Calibration of K-Type thermocouple temperature sensor and derive equation of temperature as function of 

voltage. (1 week) 
10. Study on validation of different radiation laws (a) Lambert’s Distance Law (b) Lambert’s Direction Law (Cosine 

Law) (C) Stefan Boltzmann’s Law (d) Kirchhoff’s Law. (2 week) 
 

Reference Books 
1. Incropera, F. P.  & Dewitt,  D.  P., (2011), Fundamental of Heat and Mass Transfer, John Wiley & Sons 
2. Cengel, Y. A. & Ghajar, A. J., (2008), Heat and Mass Transfer, McGraw Hill 
3. Holman J.P., Heat Transfer, Tata McGraw-Hill Edition, New Delhi  

 
  

28 
 



Title Mass Transfer II Number CHL3XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-3 [4.5] 
Offered for BTech Type PC 
Prerequisite Mass Transfer I   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide details of mass transfer unit operations and overview of the equipment. This is a 2nd course in the series of 
mass transfer followed by mass transfer I. 

 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
Gain detailed understanding of the mass transfer unit operations and it’s industrial applications. 

 
Contents 
Mass Transfer Overview and Diffusion in Solids: [4 lectures] various solid geometries in diffusion (1 lecture), 
diffusion (1 lecture), structure of solids and diffusion (2 lectures) 
Gas Absorption (in Liquids/ Solvents): [12 lectures] Equilibrium solubility (1 lecture), two component systems, 
ideal and non-ideal liquid solutions, solvent selection (5 lectures), material balances – countercurrent flow, 
absorbers, concurrent flow, stage operations, absorption factor, non-isothermal operations, tray efficiency (4 
lectures), continuous contact equipment, Henry’s law, transfer units, multi-component systems (2 lectures). 
Distillation in Tray Columns: [10 lectures] Multicomponent systems, flash vaporization, partial condensation (3 
lectures), differential distillation, Ponchon and Savarit Method for tray towers, Single Vs multiple feeds (3 lectures), 
McCabe & Thiele Method, reflux ratios, azeotropic mixtures (4 lectures).  
Distillation with Packed Towers: [8 lectures] Multicomponent systems, reflux ratios (3 lectures). Lewis and 
Matheson Calculation, Method of Thiele and Geddes, azeotropic distillation (3 lectures), extractive distillation, low 
pressure distillation (2 lectures). 
Solid-Fluid Operations: [8 lectures] Effect of temperature and pressure, liquid-solid systems, the Freundlich 
equation (3 lectures), stage wise operations, equipment, fluidized and moving beds, principles of ion-exchange, 
drying (5 lectures) 
Laboratory Experiments 
Liquid-liquid extraction (3 experiments) 
Adsorption 
Ion exchange 
Drying 
Cooling Tower (2 experiments) 
Membrane process (2 experiments) 
 
Textbook 
1. Treybal, R.E., (2017), Mass Transfer Operation, 3rd Ed., McGraw Hill Education. 
2.  Dutta, B.K., (2007), Principles of Mass Transfer and Separation Processes, 2nd edition, Prentice Hall of India.  
3. Foust, A.S., (1980), Principles of Unit Operations, 2nd Edition, Wiley, New York.  
 
Reference Books 
McCabe W.L., Smith J.C. and Harriott P. (2017), Unit Operations of Chemical Engineering, 7th Ed., McGraw Hill 
 
Online Course Material 
1. Majumdor S.K. and Das C., Mass Transfer Operations I, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemical 

Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103103035/ 
2. Mandal B., Mass Transfer Operations I, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian 

Institute of Technology Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/103/103103145/ 
 
 
 
 

29 
 



Title Process Plant Design & Economics Number CHLP4XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P  [C] 3-0-3 [4.5] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type PC 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
Introduce basic concepts in Process Equipment Design, engineering economics, safety features and its application 
to chemical engineering. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand technical and business related information to design equipment required in Chemical industries. 
2.  Follow a logical sequence of interconnected unit operations for an effective chemical engineering process. 

 
Contents 
Mechanical design of process equipment: Background and relevance, Concept of design and economics in 
chemical industries, pressure vessels, tall columns, process piping design (5 lectures); Materials and Fabrication 
Selection, Design variations, Selection criteria, process calculations (4 lectures). [9 lectures] 
Heat Exchange Equipment: Rating of an existing unit and design of a new system of shell and tube heat exchangers 
(4 lectures); design of multiple-effect evaporator (3 lectures). [7 lectures] 
Mass Exchange Equipment: Design of a sieve-tray tower for distillation (3 lectures); design of a packed tower for 
gas absorption (3 lectures). [6 lectures] 
Pump and Compressor: Types of pumps and selection criteria (2 lectures), calculations of a pumping circuit and 
rating, characteristic curves (2 lectures), Cavitation and NPSH, blowers and compressors, Single/multistage 
compression, Typical multistage compressor calculations (4 lectures). [8 lectures]  
Economics: Basic concepts in economics, Economic Design criteria; Cost and Asset Accounting; Cost Estimation; 
Interest and Investment Costs (4 lectures); Profitability, estimation of various costs to install and run a plant; 
interest costs and present/future worth of cashflows (4 lectures); methods for depreciation calculation; discounted 
cost flow/net present worth methods for profitability analysis (4 lectures). [12 lectures] 
 
Laboratory Experiments 
1.  Process and mechanical design calculations for process equipment. (6h) 
2.  Numerical studies in reactor design. (6h) 
3.  Design and analysis of separation equipment. (6h) 
4.  Steady-state simulation of flow sheets. (6h) 
5.  Optimization and costing in flow sheets. (3h) 
6.  Design and analysis of control systems. (3h) 
7.  Process flow simulations using commercial simulators. (6h) 
8.  Process economics and Profit analysis. (6h) 
 
Text Books 
1. M.S. Peters, K.D. Timmerhaus, R. West, 2003 ‘Plant Design and Economics for Chemical Engineers’, 5th edition, 

McGraw Hill. 
2.  R. Smith, 1995, ‘Chemical Process Design’, McGraw Hill. 
 
Reference Books 
1.  F.C. Jelen and J.H. Black, 1992, ‘Cost and Optimization Engineering’, McGraw Hill, 3rd ed. 
2.  S. Walas, 1988,’Chemical Process Equipment Selection and Design’, Butterworth. 
 
Online Course Material 
Moholkar V.S., Process Design Decisions and Project Economics, NPTEL course material, Department of Chemical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103103039/ 
 

 

30 
 



Title Transport Phenomena Number CHL4XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-1-0 [4] 
Offered for  B.Tech   Type PC 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge about momentum, heat and mass transfer in chemical engineering systems and their 

analogous behavior. 
2.  Train the student to create chemical engineering knowledge using the transport phenomena approach with 

special focus on combined transport problems. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify and analyze the properties and mechanisms of momentum, energy and mass transport. 
2. Analyze, design and solve problems combining these transport phenomena in chemical engineering. 
 
Contents 
Fractal 1: [14 Lectures] 
Basics of Transport phenomena:  Introduction (1 lecture), Basic concepts of Vector and Tensor Analysis (3 lectures) 
[4 lectures] 
Momentum transport: Basic concepts, Euler/Lagrangian viewpoint, laminar and turbulent flows (3 lectures), 
boundary layers, stress tensor, Shell momentum balances, equations of change, dimensional analysis (5 lectures), 
applications to isothermal flow of Newtonian & non-Newtonian fluids (2 lectures). [10 lectures] 
Fractal 2: [14 Lectures]  
Energy transport: Basics of energy transport, conductive, convective and viscous dissipation energy fluxes (5 
lectures), Equations of change for non-isothermal systems (3 lectures), dimensional analysis, and applications to 
steady- state conduction and convection (6 lectures) [14 lectures] 
Fractal 3: [14 Lectures] 
Mass transport: Basics of mass transport, mechanisms, and mass and molar fluxes [3 lectures] 
Continuity equation: Derivation for a binary mixture (2 lectures), convection- diffusion problems, Unsteady state 
mass, heat and momentum transport (4 lectures), Formulation of transport problems from nature (5 lectures). [11 
lectures]  
 
Tutorials 
Tutorial sheets will be provided every week as homework assignments and will be discussed in the next slot. It 
will help the students to conceptualize the problems and understand the methods to solve transport related 
problems.  
1. Formulation of transport problems [1 lectures] 
2. Vector, Tensor analysis [1 lectures] 
3. Newtonian and non-Newtonian momentum transport [4 lectures] 
4. Boundary layer problems [1 lectures] 
5. Steady state energy transport [2 lectures] 
6. Flux [1 lectures] 
7. Diffusion and convection [1 lectures] 
8. Unsteady state transport problems [3 lectures] 

 
Text Books 
1. Bird, R.B., Stewart, W.E. and Lightfoot, E.N., (2006), Transport Phenomena, 2nd ed., Wiley India. 
2. Welty, C. E., Wicks, R. E., Wilson, G. L. Rorrer, (2007), Fundamentals of Momentum, Heat, and Mass Transfer. 
5th ed., Wiley India Pvt. Ltd.  
 
Reference Books  
1. Geankoplis C.J., 2004, Transport Processes and Separation Process Principles, 4th Ed., Prentice-Hall of India. 
2. Brodkey, R.S., Hershey H.C., 2003, Basic concepts in transport phenomena, a unified  approach. Vol 1, Brodkey 

Publishing. 

31 
 



3. Deen, W.M., (1998), Analysis of Transport Phenomena, Oxford University Press.  
4. Thompson, W.J., (2000) Introduction to Transport Phenomena, Prentice Hall. 
 
Online Course Material  
Transport Phenomena’ by Prof. S.K. Gupta, NPTEL: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/102/103102024/  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
 



Title Process Control & AI Number CHLP4XX0 
Applications 

Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for  B.Tech.   Type PC 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1.  To impart knowledge about the dynamics and control strategies for linear and non-linear processes along with 

control elements in continuous and discrete domains. 
2. Introduce various paradigms that come under the broad umbrella of AI and the application of Internet of Things 

(IoT) in process Control. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Have fair understanding of the dynamics and control strategies for linear and non-linear processes along with 

control elements in continuous and discrete domains. 
2.  Have fair knowledge of IoT and AI application and have the ability to develop an understanding of where and 

how AI can be used in the field of chemical engineering. 
 
Contents 
Introduction 
The concept of process dynamics and control, History and Relation of AI and IoT in control systems [2 lectures] 
Review of feedback control, On-Off Control, Valve Gains, transfer function, dynamic model building [3 lectures] 
Dynamic Behavior of Processes 
Response of first and second order processes, Approximation of higher-order processes transfer function, Process 
with time delays, MIMO Processes [4 lectures] 
Stability and Controller Design 
Review of stability analysis (Routh-Hurwitz test), root-locus method [4 lectures] 
PID Controller design, Tuning, and Applications in Process control [5 Lectures] 
Frequency Response 
Review of Bode and Nyquist plots, Gain and Phase margins, Stability using frequency response [5 lectures] 
Effect of process parameters on Bode and Nyquist plots, control system design by frequency response methods [4 
lectures] 
AI and IoT in control systems 
Modes of control action, integration of AI and IoT, Fuzzy controllers, neural network for controllers [5 Lectures] 
Control of complex chemical processes and equipment, valve, real time computer control of process equipment [5 
Lectures] 
AI in Chemical Processes 
AI techniques in process monitoring, fault detection and diagnosis. [5 lectures]  
 
Laboratory experiments 
1. Basics of control system components, signals and standards (2 hrs.) 
2. Pressure measuring devices (2 hrs.) 
3. Level measurement (2 hrs)  
4. Flow measuring devices (2 hrs.) 
5. Temperature measuring devices (2 hrs)  
6. Humidity, density, viscosity and pH measuring devices (2 hrs.)  
7. Pressure controllers: regulators, safety valves (2 hrs)  
8. Flow control actuators: different types of valves (2 hrs.)  
9. Computer process control, PLC, DCS, SCADA (4 hrs.) 
10. AI/IoT in Chemical plants (4 hrs)  

 
Text Books 
1. Coughanowr D. R. and LeBlanc S., (2008), Process System Analysis and Control, 3rd Ed., McGraw Hill.  

33 
 



2. Quantrille, T.E. and Liu, Y.A., (1991), Artificial Intelligence in Chemical Engineering, Academic Press. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Stephanopoulos G., (1990), Chemical Process Control – An Introduction to Theory and Practice, Prentice-Hall 

of India.  
2. Boullart, L., Krijgsman, A., Vingerhoeds,R.A., (1992), Application of Artificial Intelligence in Process Control, 

Pergamon Press Ltd. England. 
 

Online Course Material 
1. Jogwar, S., Chemical Process Control, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemical Engineering IIT 

Bombay,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/101/103101142/ 
2. Rengasamy, R., Process Control-Design, Analysis and Assessment, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 

Chemical Engineering IIT Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/106/103106148/ 
 
  

34 
 



Title Fluid Mechanics Lab Number  MEP3XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2[1] 
Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 
Prerequisite Fluid Mechanics   
Objectives 
1. To introduce various forms of flow measuring devices and techniques 
2. To provide hands on experience on in the area of experimental fluid mechanics 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have: 
1. Ability to design experimental methods for fluid flow problems 
2. Ability to interpret data from experiments of fluid flows and usage of charts and hand books 
 
Contents (13-14 Classes) 
1. Determination of head loss in pipes having different diameters, different materials and different roughness  
2. Determination of pressure drop at different types of bends and valves  
3. Reynolds apparatus to measure critical Reynolds number for pipe flows  
4. Lift and Drag measurement in an airfoil using pressure measurements  
5. Wake profile measurement  
6. Wind tunnel air velocity profile measurement using Pitot static tube 
7. Working principle of different flow meters (orifice plate, venture meter, turbine, Rota meter, electromagnetic 

flow meter 
8. Flow measurement around an object or blockage using PIV technique 
 
Reference Books 
1.  Fox, R. W., Pitchard,P.  J.,and McDonald, A. T., (2010), Introduction to Fluid Mechanics, 7thEdition, John Wiley 

& Sons Inc. 
2. Cimbala, J.M., Cengel, Y. A. (2010), Fluid Mechanics: Fundamentals and Applications, McGraw-Hill  

 
 
  

35 
 



15. Detailed Course Content of Programme Elective Courses: 
 

Title Industrial management and safety for Chemical Number CHL4XX0 
engineers 

Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech.   Type Program Elective 

Prerequisite None   

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide information about handling of hazardous materials and safety in Chemical plants. 
2.  Illustrate the method of risk assessment to avoid accidents in plants. 
  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand the industrial practices of handling hazardous materials and safety assessment. 
2.  Assess the safety in chemical plants and provide recommendations to avoid accidents in process industries. 
 
Contents  
Risk Assessment and safety: Introduction; Probability theory; event tress; fault trees; LOPA; QRA; practical 
application of QRA; software for QRA; (4 lectures) safety and Loss Prevention; hazard and risk; accident and loss 
statistics; nature of accident process; inherent safety (4 lectures). [8 lectures]  
Toxicity, Dispersion models and Industrial Hygiene: Definition; effect of toxicants; dose and response curves; 
relative toxicity and threshold limits; Parameters affecting dispersion(4 lectures); neutrally buoyant dispersion 
models; toxic effect criteria; release mitigation, Govt. Regulations for industrial safety; occupational health hazards 
and their control(5 lectures). [9 lectures] 
Fires and Explosions in Chemical plants: Fire Triangle; flammability characteristics of liquid and vapour; 
flammability diagram; ignition energy; auto ignition and auto oxidation (4 lectures); adiabatic compression; 
ignition sources; sprays and mists; explosions; fire protection systems, designs to prevent fires and explosions; 
ventilation; sprinkler systems(5 lectures). [9 lectures] 
Accident Investigation and Case Histories: Theories; methodologies; impact of human factors; root cause analysis; 
developing effective recommendations (5 lectures) ; study of major accidents, Strategies to avoid accidents (such 
as, System design; chemical reactivity; static electricity; procedures, etc.) (4 lectures). [9 lectures] 
Integrity Management: Definition; risk management; Barrier models; Safety Critical Equipment (3 lectures); Risk 
Register; Project Health, Safety and Environment Review; Safety Management; reliability management (4 lectures). 
[7 lectures] 

 
Textbook  
1.  Daniel A. Crowl and Joseph F Louvar, 2002, Chemical Process Safety Fundamentals with Applications, 3rd 

edition, Prentice Hall. 
2.  Trevor A. Kletz., 2001, Hazop & Hazan, 2nd edition, I.ChemE. 
 
Online Course Material 
Sinha, S., Chemical Process Safety, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemical Engineering IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/107/103107156/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
 



Title Product Design in Chemical Engineering Number CHL4XX0 

Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2-0-0 (2) 
Offered for B.Tech.   Type PE 
Prerequisite None   

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide information about discovery, design and delivery in the chemical industry. 
2.  Illustrate the conceptual implementation of product development in industries. 
  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Understand the process associated with new product development and commercialization in chemical engineering.  
 
Contents  
General features: Introduction, Factors, idea generation and screening (screening vs. high resolution), Framework 
for chemical product design (3 lectures), processing and verification of new material, Classification of chemical 
products, environmental impact and sustainability (3 lectures). [6 lectures] 
Product development aspects: Structure of Chemical Product Engineering, concept development and testing (4 
lectures), product architecture and industrial design (2lectures). [6 lectures] 
Computer aided methods: Heuristics, Molecular dynamics for property prediction(5 lectures), Population-based 
model, Factorial design, Group contribution methods (5 lectures). [10 lectures] 
Case studies: water filter, heat exchanger, paints and inks, adhesives, liquid fuels by cracking of heavy oil, 
production of fine Chemicals, fuels and chemicals from syngas, etc. [6 lectures] 

 
Textbook  
1. Montgomery, D. C., 2009, Design and Analysis of Experiments, John Wiley & Sons. 
2. Jess,A., Wasserscheid, P., 2020, Chemical Technology: From Principles to Products. Willey, Second Edition. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Ulrich, Karl T., Eppinger, Steve D., and Yang, Maria C., 2020, Product Design and Development, 7th ed., 

McGraw-Hill Education. 
2. Recent published journal articles on relevant topics. 

 
  

37 
 



Title Unit operations Number CHL4XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech.   Type PE 
Prerequisite    

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide general principle and mechanism of different chemical engineering processes. 
  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Understand and correlate the principles of different processes and suggest design solutions to engineering 
problems related to separation. 
 
Contents  
Particulate matter: Introduction, Particulate matter, size reduction (4 lectures), enlargement and separation, 
Crushers and Grinders (3 lectures). [7 lectures] 
Packed Columns and Granular Beds: Motion of Particles in a Fluid, flow through beds and columns (4 lectures), 
Single Fluid flow through Granular Beds, Specific Surface and Voidage (5 lectures), Packings, pressure drop in 
packed column (5 lectures). [14 lectures] 
Filtration and Membrane Separation: Theory, filtration equipment, membrane processes (5 lectures), general 
equation, microfiltration, fouling, electrolysis (5 lectures), reverse osmosis, pervaporation (4 lectures). [14 lectures] 
Flotation and sedimentation: Fundamental concept, froth flotation (3 lectures), gravity settling, centrifugation, 
design criteria (4 lectures). [7 lectures] 
 
Textbook  
1. Harker, J. H., Backhurst, J. R., Richardson, J.F., 2013, Coulson and Richardson’s Chemical Engineering, 2nd 

Volume, 5th Edition, Butterworth-Heinemann. 
2. W.L. McCabe, J. Smith, P. Harriot, 2005, Unit Operations of Chemical Engineering, 7th Edition, McGraw Hill. 
 
Reference Books  
E. Ortega-Rivas, 2012, Unit Operations of Particulate Solids: Theory and Practice, CRC   Press, FL, 2012. 
 
Online Course Material 
Kishore N, Mechanical Unit Operations, NPTEL course material, Department of Chemical Engineering, 
IITGuwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/103/103103155/  

 
  

38 
 



Title Membrane Technology  Number CHL4XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech.   Type PE 
Prerequisite Fluid Mechanics   

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide an insight to the membrane-based separations that is an integral part of the down-stream processing of 
various industries. 
   
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Develop necessary skills to design appropriate membrane-based separation technique/s as per the need. 

 
Contents  
Introduction: Membrane and membrane materials, Material properties. [4 lectures] 
Membrane Preparation: Phase inversion process, Preparation of composite membrane, Inorganic membranes (4 
lectures)  
Membrane Characterization: Microfiltration (MF) characterization, Ultrafiltration (UF) characterization [4 lectures] 
Membrane Transport: Pressure driven transport through porous and nonporous membrane, Osmosis concepts (5 
lectures), Reverse Osmosis (RO), Nanofiltration (NF), Transport models, Micellar-enhanced and affinity UF (5 
lectures). MF transport, Facilitated transport, Membrane contactors (3 lectures). [13 lectures] 
Concentration/ Temperature driven and Hybrid membrane processes: Liquid membranes, Gas separation, 
Membrane distillation, hybrid membrane processes [5 lectures] 
Challenges and solutions: Membrane fouling (2 lectures), RO, NF, UF, MF(5 lectures), Dialysis, Electrodialysis, 
Pervaporation (5 lectures). [12 lectures] 
 
Textbook  
Baker, R.W., (2004), Membrane Technology and Applications, 2nd Edition, Membrane Technology and Research 
Inc., Menlo Park, CA. 
 
Reference Books  
Tewari, P.K., (2016), Nanocomposite Membrane Technology: Fundamentals and Applications, CRC Press, Taylor 
& Francis Group. 

Online Course Material 
Mohant K, Membrane Technology, NPTEL course material, Department of Chemical Engineering, IIT Guwahati, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103103163/ 

 
  

39 
 



Title Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Chemical Number CHL4XX0 
Engineering   

Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, Dual Degree Type PE 
Prerequisite Material and Energy Balance, Scientific Computations   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide background on AI in chemical engineering and allied systems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1.  Gain fundamental understanding of the application of AI in chemical and allied engineering. 
2.  Learn to develop AI model equations, approaches for chemical and allied engineering systems. 
3.  Learn to write basic codes of AI for simple systems. 
 
Contents 
Artificial Intelligence in Chemical Engineering Background: Early Attempts, Expert System Era (1 Lecture) , 
Neural Network Era, Effects and Lacunae of Expert System Era and Neural Network Era on Chemical Engineering 
(2 Lectures), Deep Learning and Data Science Era (2 Lectures). [5 Lectures] 
Application of AI in modelling: AI in chemical process modelling (2 Lectures), AI in optimisation of chemical 
process (2 Lectures), Application of neural networks in chemical process control, Modelling Real-World Processes: 
Deep and Shallow Knowledge Integrated with Approximate Reasoning in a Diagnostic Expert System (4 
Lectures), Application of AI techniques in fault detection and diagnosis of chemical engineering (3 Lectures), 
Numeric to Symbolic Structures and Relationships (1 Lecture).  [12 Lectures] 
Case Studies: Oxidative coupling of methane (OCM) over the Mn/Na2WO4/SiO2 catalyst in a fluidized bed reactor 
(4 Lectures), Control of Reactive Distillation Column (4 Lectures), Use of Qualitative Models in Discrete Event 
Simulation to Analyze Malfunctions 
in Processing Systems (4 Lectures), Fault Detection and Diagnosis Using Artificial Neural 
Networks (4 Lectures), A Modular Approach to Multiple Faults Diagnosis (4 Lectures), Design of Protein 
Purification Processes by Heuristic Search (4 Lectures). [24 Lectures] 
AI in Chemical Engineering Recent Trends and Future Outlook: Emergence in large scale systems of self-
organizing intelligent agents. [1 Lecture] 
 
Textbook 
Michael L. Mavrovouniotis, 1990, Artificial Intelligence in Process Engineering, Academic Press 

 
References 
1. Venkat Venkatasubramanian, 2019, The Promise of Artificial Intelligence in 

Chemical Engineering: Is It Here, Finally?, AIChE, Vol. 65, No. 2 
2. Zeinab Hajjar, Shokoufe Tayyebi and Mohammad Hosein Eghbal Ahmadi, 2018, Application of AI in 

Chemical Engineering. 
3. Eghbal-Ahmadi M-H, Zaerpour M, Daneshpayeh M, Mostoui N. Optimization of fluidized bed reactor of 

oxidative coupling of methane. International Journal of Chemical Reactor Engineering. 2012; 10:1-21 
4. Araromi DO, Sonibare JA, Emuoyibofarhe JO. Fuzzy identification of reactive distillation for acetic acid 

recovery from waste water. Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering. 2014; 2:1394-1403 
5. Shih-Bo Hung and Ming-Jer Lee, 2006, Control of Different Reactive Distillation 

Configurations, AIChE, Vol. 52, No. 4 
6. Neha Sharma and Kailash Singh, 2010, Control of Reactive Distillation Column: A Review, International 

Journal of Chemical Reactor Engineering, Vol. 8 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 



Title Petrochemical Engineering Number CHL4XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for BTech Type PE 
Prerequisite None   

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide background information about the petrochemical engineering including definition, petrochemical 
products and processes 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
Gain a holistic view of Petrochemical Engineering and learn about the importance of petrochemical products and 
processes 
 
Contents  
Introductory Concepts for Crude Petroleum and Petrochemicals: Composition of crude oil, physical properties of 
crude oil, origin of hydrocarbons (3 lectures), petrochemical global and domestic petrochemical industries, 
definitions, feedstock for petrochemicals, intermediate and finished products in petrochemicals (3 lectures) [6 
lectures] 
Chemical Processes in Petrochemicals: Dissociation and dehydrogenation (thermal and catalytic cracking) (3 
lectures), hydrogenation, addition, condensation, polymerization (3 lectures) [6 lectures]  
Petrochemical Intermediates from Petroleum Products: Introduction, manufacturing processes for carbon black 
from methane/ natural gas, polyethylene production from ethane (5 lectures), Terephthalic acid and PET from 
from Xylene, Naphtha for olefins, sulfuric acid from sulfur, cosmetics and food grade coating wax from wax, 
naphtha cracking (5 lectures). [10 lectures] 
Petrochemical Finished Products from Intermediates: Manufacturing of paint, fiber, plastics (5 lectures), rubber, 
Nylons, fibers (3 lectures), processing of plastic, rubber and fibers (4 lectures). [12 lectures] 
Layout and Unit Operations in Petrochemical Plants: Petrochemical complex, Reactors processing units, offsite 
facilities, power and steam generating plants, cooling tower. [4 lectures] 
Sustainability and Latest Trends in Petrochemical Plants: Effluent water treatment, gaseous effluent treatment, 
latest trends [4 lectures] 
  
Textbook  
1. Hatch, Lewis Frederic, and Sami Matar (1981) From hydrocarbons to petrochemicals, Gulf Publishing Company, 

Book Division. 
2. Chaudhuri U. R. (2011) Fundamentals of Petroleum and Petrochemical Engineering, CRC Press 
 
Reference Books  
Meyers, Robert, and Robert Allen Meyers, eds. (2005) Handbook of petrochemicals production processes. 
McGraw-Hill. 

 
Online Course Materials 
Pant, K.K. and Kunzru, D., Petroleum Refinery Engineering, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Chemical 
Engineering, IIT Delhi and Department of Chemical Engineering, IIT Kanpur 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/102/103102022/ 
 

 
  

41 
 



Title Petroleum Refinery Process Modelling Number CHL4XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1-0-2 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech., Dual Degree in Chemical Engineering Type PE 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will provide: 
Thorough understanding in the area of process models for petroleum refinery operations. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand various process models available for refinery processes. 
2. Learn simulations using Aspen Hysys/ Matlab for petroleum refinery units 
 
Contents  
Energy conservation and new trends in petroleum refinery operations: Data Driven Modelling of Atmospheric 
and Vacuum Distillation Unit (4 Lectures), Data Analytics of: Fluid Catalytic Cracking (FCC) Process (2 Lectures), 
Continuous Catalyst Regeneration (CCR) and Reforming Process (3 Lectures), Hydroprocessing Units (2 
Lectures). Alkylation, Delayed Coking, and Refinery-Wide Simulations (3 Lectures). [14 lectures] 

 
Experiments [28 hours] 
1. Building the Model in Aspen HYSYS Petroleum Refining Components Design 
2. Model Applications to Process Optimization 
3. Rebuild Model Using “Backblending” Procedure 
4. Simplified VDU Model 
5. Rigorous Model from a Simplified Model 
6. Kinetic Models 
7. Unit-Level Models 
8. Aspen HYSYS Petroleum Refining FCC Model 
9. Calibrating the Aspen HYSYS Petroleum Refining FCC Model 
10. Basic FCC Model 
11. Perform Case Studies to Quantify Effects of Key FCC Operating Variables 
12. Generate Delta-Base Vectors for Linear Programming 
13. Aspen HYSYS Petroleum Refining Catalytic Reformer Model 
14. Model Calibration 
15. Build a Downstream Fractionation System 
16. Aspen HYSYS Petroleum Refining HCR Modelling 
17. H2-to-Oil Ratio versus Product Distribution, Remained Catalyst Life and Hydrogen Consumption 
18. Build and Calibrate a Preliminary Reactor Model of HCR 
19. Hydrofluoric Acid Alkylation Process Simulation 
20. Simulation and Calibration of a Delayed Coking 
21. Simplified Model of Delayed Coker by Petroleum Shift 
22. Refinery-Wide Process Simulation 

 
Textbook  
Y. A. Liu, Ai-Fu Chang, and Kiran Pashikanti, 2018, Petroleum Refinery Process Modeling Integrated 
Optimization Tools and Applications, Wiley 

 
  

42 
 



Title Basics of Reliability and Maintainability Engineering Number CHL4XX0 
for System Safety 

Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-1-0 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech, Dual Degree Type Elective 
Prerequisite Mathematics I and Mathematics II   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide background on Reliability Engineering Models that can be integrated for AI development in system 
safety. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1.  Gain fundamental understanding of the models used for failure detection and reliability design. 
2.  Learn to connect failure and reliability models for AI approach towards system safety. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Study of Reliability and Maintainability Engineering, Concepts, Terms and Definitions, 
Applications (1 Lecture), Brief History (1 Lecture). [2 Lectures] 
Failure Detection Models: Failure Distribution (4 Lectures), Constant Failure Rate Model (5 Lectures), Time 
Dependent Failure Models (5 Lectures). [14 Lectures] 
Reliability Models: Reliability of Systems (4 Lectures), State Dependant Systems, Physical Reliability Models (5 
Lectures), Design for Reliability (5 Lectures). [14 Lectures] 
Maintainability: General Overview (4 Lectures), Design for Maintainability (4 Lectures), Availability (4 Lectures). 
[12 Lectures] 
 
Tutorials 
Problem solving on Failure Detection Models, Reliability Models and on Designing Maintainability 
 
Textbooks 
1. Charles E. Ebeling, 2004, An Introduction to Reliability and Maintainability Engineering, 3rd Edition, TMH. 
2. Kailash C. Kapur and Michael Pecht, 2014, Reliability Engineering, John Wiley & Sons Inc. 
 
References 
Krishna B. Mishra, 2008, Reliability Engineering: A Perspective, DOI: 10.1007/978-1-84800-131-2_19. 

 
  

43 
 



Title Introduction to Complex Fluids Number CHL4XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech.   Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite Fluid Mechanics   

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide information of various materials that do not follow the characteristics of simple fluid like water 

(Newtonian Fluid). 
2.  Highlight the underlying intermolecular interactions and its relation to the material properties. 
  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Analyze and explain the anomalous behavior of different fluids. 
2.  Explain the rheological behavior of viscoelastic materials and the structure-property relation of fluid. 
 
Contents  
Complex fluids: Introduction, common features & applications (3 lectures), Viscoelasticity, Microstructures, 
Intermolecular and Surface forces (5 lectures, Forces in colloidal system and stability (5 lectures), Mechanical 
Rheology (2 lectures). [15 lectures] 

 
Types of complex fluids and their properties: Colloidal dispersions, polymeric solutions (4 lectures), gels, liquid 
crystals (4 lectures), Emulsions and Blends (3 lectures), Surfactants and micelles (3 lectures). [14 lectures] 

 
Micro and Mesoscopic Systems: Self-assembly, phases(4 lectures), Characterization of structure-property 
relationships in complex fluids(5 lectures), Structures and Rheology of dispersions(4 lectures). [13 lectures] 

  
Textbook  
1. R. G. Larson, 1999, The Structure and Rheology of Complex Fluids, 1st Edition, Oxford University Press, 
2. Jones, R. A. L., 2002, Soft Condensed Matter, 1st Edition, Oxford University Press. 
 
Reference Books  
Isaraelachvili, J., 2011, Intermolecular and Surface Forces, 3rd Edition, Academic Press. 

 
  

44 
 



Title Interfacial engineering in soft matter Number CHL4XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech.   Type PE 
Prerequisite    

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Introduce the fundamental concepts of interfaces and its application. 
2.  Provide quantitative and conceptual treatment of interfacial forces and phenomena. 
  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Anticipate the stability of a given interface. 
2. Infer microscopic processes at the interface and suggest design solutions to engineering problems. 
 
Contents  
Interface: Concept and definition, physical surfaces, surface chemistry and physics of colloids (5 lectures), thin 
films, dispersions, emulsions, foams (5 lectures), interfacial self-assembly, amphiphilic system (3 lectures), 
comparison and contrast of liquid and solid interfaces (3 lectures). [16 lectures] 
Surfaces and forces: Interfacial energy and forces, wetting, shape of interfaces (5 lectures), Intermolecular forces 
and potentials; solvation, structural and hydration forces (5 lectures); particle-particle interactions, thin film 
stability (3 lectures), self-organized monolayers and bilayers, electro-kinetic phenomena, adsorption (3 lectures). 
[16 lectures]  
Industrial aspects: Interfacial rheology and transport, Catalysis (4 lectures), reaction-injection moulding, emulsions 
and foams that require stabilization (4 lectures), emulsifier, Coating Processes (2 lectures). [10 lectures] 

 
Textbook  
1. Isaraelachvili, J., 2011, Intermolecular and Surface Forces, 3rd Edition, Academic Press. 
2. Ghosh, P., 2009, Colloid and Interface Science, PHI Learning. 
 
Reference Books  
G.J.M. Koper, 2009, An Introduction to Interfacial Engineering, second edition. 
 
Online Course Material 
Ghosh, P., Introduction to Interfacial Engineering, NPTEL course material, Department of Chemical Engineering, 
IIT Guwahati, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103103033/ 

 
  

45 
 



Title Bioprinting Number BSBE4XX0 

Department BSBE L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech  Program Type Program Elective 

Prerequisite Basic knowledge of bioengineering    
Objectives 
The instructor will provide the essential concepts of 3D bioprinting and will apprise the student about the potential 
of 3D bioprinting for various applications.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The student will be able to 
1. Analyze the properties and performances of different bioinks.  
2. Design a bioprinting strategy for specific application. 
 
Contents 
Introduction to bioprinting (14 lecture): Scope, strategies and workflow (3 lecture), bioinks : types,  components, 
physico-chemical and biological properties (5 lecture), cells and cellular micro-aggregates in bioinks (2 lecture), 
cross-linking strategies for bioinks,  commercially available bioinks, bioinks vs biomaterial inks, scaffold free 
bioprinting (4 lecture).  
Bioprinting processes (14 lecture): Digital designing of 3D organ/tissue model, (3 lecture), 3D bioprinting processes: 
extrusion based bioprinting, droplet bioprinting (4 lecture), laser assisted bioprinting, stereolithography based 
bioprinting, novel bioprinting processes (5 lecture), selection criteria for 3D printing processes, limitation of 
bioprinting processes (2 lecture).  
Application of bioprinting (14 lecture): Bioprinting for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine  
(4 lecture), bioprinted tissue model for drug and cosmetic research, bioprinted food (4 lecture), bioprinted bacterial 
biofilm and biosensors (2 lecture), Bioprinting in chemical engineering (4 lecture).  
 
Text book 
W. Y. Yeong and  C. K. Chua, Bioprinting: Principles And Applications, World Scientific Publishing Co Pte Ltd, 
2015, 1st Ed 

Reference book 
A. Khademhosseini, G. Camci-Unal,  3D Bioprinting in Regenerative Engineering: Principles and Applications, CRC 
Press , 2018 , 1st Edr 
 
Self-learning materials 
Prof. Vignesh Muthuvijayan , IIT Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102/106/102106081/ 
 

 
  

46 
 



Title 3-D Printing: Material Processing and Properties Number MTL4XX0 
Department Metallurgical and Materials Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Materials Engineering Type PE 
Prerequisite Nil   

Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce: 
1.  Importance of 3-D printing of materials for various range of applications  
2. Process control and product quality evaluation through application of basics  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to gain: 
1.  Insight of the evolutionary technology for rapid and cost effective growth of products 
2.  Aptitude to translate the knowledge into novel components with industrialization competitiveness  
 
Contents  
Introduction [5 lectures]: 3-D printing small but multipurpose product inspiration, Science fiction to innovation, 
Multidisciplinary terminology, Current system configurations, Construction, Classification  
Hardware – software – material Interdependence  [5 lectures]:, Essence of hardware, software and materials, 
Impact on systems engineering in various industries, Processing philosophy  
Raw Materials  [4 lectures]: Forms and sources of raw materials, Processing methods and characteristic properties, 
Material specifications based industries and processing technology e.g. aerospace, medicine 
3-D Printing Processes  [2 lectures]: Process flow and basics of stages involved, Process control, Upgrading options, 
3-D product design, evaluation, justification and integration (DEJI) model,   
Additive Manufacturing of Metallic Systems [5 lectures]: Light metals and alloys, Superalloys, Intermetallic 
compounds, Shape memory alloys, porous metals, Rare earth permanent magnets 
Thermo-mechanical Effects [2 lectures]: Phase transformation, Microstructure evolution, Variation in properties, 
Thermo-mechanical modeling of microstructure evolution and mechanical properties 
3-D Printing of Polymers and  Hydrogels [5 lectures]: Natural polymers, Synthetic polymers, Design 
considerations and guidelines, Mechanics modeling, AM of tooling for mass production processes, 3-D bioprinting 
hardware,  Reactive inkjet printing of nylon materials, Stimuli responsive hydrogels, Biopolymer hydrogel 
biolinks3-D Printing of Ceramics and composites [5 lectures]: Processing technology and options, Laminated object 
manufacturing, Laser Engineered net shaping, Bio-active ceramics and bio-active glasses,  Engineering ceramics, 
Green-tape-based AM, Complex ceramic architecture, Metal matrix composites, Ceramic matrix composites, 
Polymer matrix composites and their variants, Nano-composites         
 Special Purpose 3-D Printing [5 lectures]: Functionally graded materials, Biomedical applications, Biomimetic 
design model, Frugal design sustainability,  Smart material- DNA origami, 4-D printing, Reconstructive surgery, 
Patient specific 3-D printing,  Hydrogen storage material, Printed and hybrid electronics enabled by digital AM 
technologies, Reverse Engineering Post-processing and Inspection techniques [2 lectures]:  Post processing 
problems and requirements, Rectification Student Presentation & Discussion [2 lectures]: Concept for developing 
prototype object, Methodology, Examining novelty and market acceptability, Translation to business idea 

Textbooks  
1.   Gibson, I., et al (Eds.) (2015), Additive Manufacturing Technology: 3D printing, Rapid Prototyping, and Direct 

Digital Manufacturing, 2nd Ed., Springer   
2. Maniruzzaman, M.. (Ed.), (2019), 3D and 4D Printing in Bio-medical Applications: Process-Engineering and 

Additive Manufacturing, Wiley- VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.  

Reference Books  
1.  Declan, M.D.. (2019), Polymer Based Additive Manufacturing- Biomedical Applications, Springer Nature. 
2.  Gu, D., (2015), Laser Additive Manufacture of High-Performance Materials,  Springer Verlag 

Online Course Material  
Ramkumar, J., 2018, NOC: Rapid Manufacturing, Department of Mechanical Engineering; IIT Kanpur,   
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/104/112104265/ 

47 
 



Title Introductory Principles in Polymer Engineering Number CHL4XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for BTech Type PE 
Prerequisite None   

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide background knowledge in polymer science and engineering to excite students to pursue further studies in 
the area of polymers and composites 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to gain: 
1.  Basic understanding of polymers 
2.  Knowledge about application of polymers in traditional as well as advanced areas 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Origin, basics definitions, examples of polymers and their applications, classification of polymers 
based on structure, processing, crystallinity(5 lectures), case study, molar mass averages, polymerization reaction 
and classification, Tacticity and isomerism in polymers(5 lectures) [10 lectures] 
Amorphous and Crystalline Polymers: Glass transition temperature, amorphous state, definition, free volume 
theory, polymer crystallinity, crystal structure and its determination, single crystals(5 lectures)semicrystalline 
polymers and examples, degree of crystallinity, melting and DSC, Defects in Crystalline Polymers (5 lectures)[10 
lectures] 
Deformation in Polymers : Elastic deformation, Definitions of stress, strain and their relationship for elastic 
deformation(5 lectures), elastic deformation in polymers,(4 lectures) viscoelasticity, examples, Mechanical 
Models(5 lectures) [14 lectures] 
Applications and other Topics in Polymer Science & Engineering: Introduction, examples and applications of 
polymer blends(3 lectures), block-copolymers, elastomers, polymer composites(5 lectures) [8 lectures] 

 
Textbook  
Young R.J. and Lovell P.A. (2011) Introduction to Polymers, 3rd Edition, CRC Press 

 
Reference Books 
Chanda M. (2006) Introduction to Polymer Science & Chemistry, CRC Press 
 
Online Course Material  
Adhikari B, Science & Technology of Polymers, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Metallurgy & Material 
Science, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113105028/ 

 
  

48 
 



Title Solid Waste Management Number CHL4XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for BTech Type PE 
Prerequisite None   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide background about the solid waste management including types, sources and processes 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
Gain holistic understanding of processes and challenges in solid waste management 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Waste generation and management in a technological society, environmental impact of solid waste, 
sources of solid waste,(3 lectures) functional elements of a solid waste management system, challenges in solid 
waste management, integrated waste management(3 lectures) [6 lectures] 
Collection and Processing of Solid Waste: Collection of MSW, material separation and handling, recyclable 
components, (3 lectures) size reduction and separation, thermal processing of waste, biological processing of waste, 
chemical processing of waste (3 lectures)[6 lectures] 
Landfills for Disposal of Solid Waste: Decomposition of solid waste in landfills, types of landfills, requirements of 
an engineered landfill,(4 lectures) layout of a landfill site, landfill operations, environmental monitoring of 
landfills(4 lectures), leachate management - landfill liners, geosynthetic materials(4 lectures) [12 lectures] 
Hazardous Waste and Management: Characteristics, landfills for hazardous waste,(4 lectures) autoclaving, 
microwaving, biomedical waste(4 lectures) [8 lectures] 
Recycling of Electronic waste and PCBs: Electronic waste management in India, electronic waste recycling, Current 
approach for PCB recycling,(5 lectures) PCB scrap characteristics, technologies for PCB recycling, toxins in PCB 
fabrication, lead-free soldering(5 lectures) [10 lectures]  
 
Textbook  
1. Khan I. H., Ahsan N. (2014) Textbook of Solid Wastes Management, CBS Publishers and Distributors 
2. Khandpur R. S. (2010) Printed Circuit Boards: Design, Fabrication, Assembly and Testing, Tata McGraw Hill 

Education Private Limited 
 
Reference Books 
1. Tchobanoglous G., Kreith F. (2002) Handbook of Solid Waste Management, 2nd Edition, McGraw Hill 
2. Shalh K. L., (1999) Basics of Solid and Hazardous Waste Management Technology, Prentice Hall. 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Ramachandra T. V., Municipal Solid Waste Management, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 

Environmental Science, IISc Bengaluru, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/120108005/ 
2. IITM-EWRE, Solid and Hazardous Waste Management, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Civil 

Engineering, IIT Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105106056/ 
 

 
  

49 
 



Title Air Pollution Control Technology Number CHL4XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech.   Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite None   

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide a broad view of air pollution and how to reduce it. 
2.  Provide information about various techniques to control different air pollution. 
  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand and explain the processes causing air pollution. 
2.  Anticipate and quantify air pollution and design methods to control it. 
 
Contents  
Air pollution: Overview, fossil fuel and automobile, nature and classification of pollutants,(4 lectures) BS-VI 
regulation, techniques to measure and quantify air pollution, air quality management, Active and future research(5 
lectures). [9 lectures]  
Industrial Air Pollution Sources and Prevention: Air Pollution in the Chemical Process Industries, Petroleum 
Industry, Power plants;(5 lectures) Aluminum, Iron and Steel Manufacturing(2 lectures); Copper, Lead and Zinc 
Smelting(2 lectures); Nickel Ore Processing and Refining(2 lectures). [11 lectures] 
Air pollution controlling techniques: Fabric filtration, cyclones, electrostatic precipitation, wet and dry scrubbing, 
condensation, thermal oxidation, Catalytic processes, Activated carbon, gas-phase biofiltration, emerging 
technologies. [15 lectures] 
Ventilation and Indoor Air Quality Control: Overview, issues and impact; Diagnose, manage and control, 
Ventilation and Air Conditioning,(3 lectures) volatile organic compounds (VOCs) household pollutants and control 
of indoor air quality, Issues related to ambient air clean-up(4 lectures). [7 lectures] 
 
Textbook  
1. Heck, R. M., Farrauto, R. J., and Gulati, S. T., 2012, Catalytic air pollution control: commercial technology. John 

Wiley & Sons. 
2. Licht, W.,1988, Air pollution control engineering: Basic calculations for particulate collection, Vol. 10, CRC Press. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Wang, L.K., Pereira, N.C., Hung, Y., 2004, Air pollution control engineering, Vol. 1,  
    Springer science + Business media. 
2. Karl B. Schnelle, Jr., Charles A. Brown, 2002,  Air Pollution Control Technology  
    Handbook, CRC Press LLC. 
 
Online Course Material 
Environmental Air Pollution, NPTEL course material, Department of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of 
Technology Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105102089/ 
 

 
  

50 
 



Title Processing of rare earth & radioactive materials Number CHL4XX0 

Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech.   Type PE 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide in depth knowledge about the processes used to purify rare earth and radioactive materials and their 
applications. 
  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Understand the mechanism of rare earth and radioactive materials separation processes and their utility. 
 
Contents  
Basic Concept: Introduction and overview, definition, atomic structures, processing and handling, history and 
trade of RE and RA(5 lectures); geological distribution, application of rare earth (RE) and radioactive (RA) 
materials(4 lectures). [9 lectures] 
Rare Earth elements: Ore mineral, classification, physical and chemical properties(4 lectures), chromatographic 
techniques for analysis, deposit exploration, mining, chemical treatment, separation processes(5 lectures), bio-
sorption, recycling, economic aspects(4 lectures). (13 lectures) 
Radioactive materials: Definition, physicochemical properties(3 lectures), Resource finding and mining, separation 
techniques(5 lectures), application in technology development, health and environment effects(4lectures). (13 
lectures) 
Sustainability and environment: Sustainability of sources and demand(2 lectures), sustainable mining, impact on 
environment, Geo-political considerations(5 lectures). (7 lectures)  

 
Textbook  
1.  Voncken, J.H.L., 2016, The Rare Earth Elements: An Introduction, Springer. 
2.  Atwood, D. A., 2012, The Rare Earth Elements: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley. 
3.  Lauf, R.J., 2008, Introduction to Radioactive Minerals, Schiffer Publishing Ltd. 
4. L'Annunziata, M. F., 2016, Radioactivity: Introduction and History, From the Quantum to Quarks. 2nd edition, 

Elsevier. 
 
Reference Books 
I. B. De Lima, W. L. Filho, 2016, ‘Rare Earths Industry: Technological, Economic, and Environmental Implications’, 
Elsevier. 

 
  

51 
 



Title Energy resources Number CHL4XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech.   Type PE 

Prerequisite None   

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide information of various energy resources and their role in modern society, with both national and global 

perspectives. 
2.  Present different technologies to harness energy from different resources, and the environmental impacts. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Describe the energy sources in use today including the extraction and use of these resources. 
2.  Address the impacts of the use of different energy sources. 
 
Contents  
Energy production, environment and economy: Introduction to energy resources and their utilization, National 
and global power generation, role of chemical engineers in power generation,(4 lectures) Concepts of ecosystems 
and environment, local regional and global implications, role of energy on economy(3 lectures). [7 lectures] 
Different resources and sustainability: Fossil fuel, natural gas, Biofuel(5 lectures), solar power, wind and tidal 
energy, geothermal, Nuclear energy,(5 lectures) energy from hydrogen and methanol, Electrochemical energy(3 
lectures), other energy sources, sustainability of different resources(3 lectures). [16 lectures] 
Energy harvesting and storage: Introduction and general concept, Techniques, materials(5 lectures); mechanism 
for different energy storage(4 lectures), AI and IoT in power generation and storage(4 lectures), storage demand, 
utilization(3 lectures). [16 lectures] 
Industry 4.0: Prelude to the concept; smart energy production, storage and utilization; Indian Govt. Policies for 
green and sustainable energy. [3 lectures] 
 
Textbook  
1.  G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert, G. K. S. Prakash,(2006), Beyond Oil and Gas: The Methanol Economy, Wiley‐VCH, 

Weinheim, Germany. 
2. Ball M. and Wietschel M.,(2009), The Hydrogen Economy Opportunities and Challenges,  Cambridge University 

Press. 
3.  Vertes, A. A., Qureshi, A., Yukawa, H.,  Blaschek, H.P.,(2010), Biomass to Biofuels, Wiley. 
4.   R.A. Huggins, Energy Storage, Springer, 2010. 
5.   Joao Cruz, Mairead Atcheson (2016). Floating offshore wind energy (1st Ed). Springer. 
6.   A.G. Ter-Gazarian, Energy Storage for Power Systems, IET Publications,2nd Edition,  2011 
7.   G. N. Tiwari, M K. Ghosal, 2004, Renewable Energy Resources: Basic Principles and Applications. Narosa 

Publishing House, New Delhi. 
 
Online Course Material 
Mondal P.,Waste to Energy Conversion, NPTEL course material, Department of Chemical Engineering, IIT 
Roorkee,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103107125/ 
 

 
  

52 
 



Title Waste Water Treatment Number CHL4XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech.   Type PE 
Prerequisite None   

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Illustrate quantitative and conceptual foundation of conventional wastewater treatment. 
2. Provide information related to the practical configurations, design and operation of conventional wastewater 

treatment processes. 
  
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand and apply the knowledge to waste water treatment and management. 
2. Advance the operation of waste water treatment plant and maintenance of equipment 
 
Contents  
Overview of water management: Water demand, supply and wastewater generation, water in operating units and 
effluent rejection, water quality parameters and standards(5 lectures); Waste water specifications, epidemiological 
and toxic aspects, nature of water pollutants, measurement techniques of water pollution, on-line analyzers, 
screening and primary Treatment(5 lectures). [10 lectures] 
Water treatment processes: General theory, primary water treatment systems such as primary settlers, 
sedimentation, Coagulation and flocculation(5lectures), filtration, disinfection, physicochemical treatment, process 
water stripping(5 lectures), insoluble hydrocarbons and sludge; biological treatment of waste water (aerobic, 
anaerobic, biofiltration, activated sludge basins)(5 lectures), biological sludge treatment, aerobic, adsorption kinetics 
in water treatment design of water treatment plants(5 lectures). [20 lectures] 
Tertiary wastewater treatment systems: Root zone technology, Ion exchange, ultraviolet (UV) treatment, removal of 
N, P, K and other trace elements,(5 lectures) sludge treatment and disposal, low cost water treatment systems, design 
of conventional wastewater treatment plants(5 lectures). [10 lectures] 
Disposal of treated wastewater: Inland surface water, land for irrigation, marine coastal areas. [2 lectures] 

 
Textbook  
1.  Peavy, H.S., Rowe, D. R., and Tchobanoglous, G., 2013, Environmental Engineering. McGraw-Hill, Indian edition. 
2.  Riffat, R., 2013, Fundamentals of Wastewater Treatment and Engineering, CRC    
     press. 
3. Spellman, F.R., 2003, Handbook of Water and Wastewater Treatment Plant Operations, CRC press. 
 
Online Course Material 
Tiwari M K, Wastewater treatment and recycling, NPTEL course material, Department of Civil Engineering, IIT 
Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105178/ 

 
  

53 
 



Title Molecular Transport Number CHL4XX0 
Phenomena 

Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 2-0-0 
Offered for  B.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objective 
The Instructor will provide basic knowledge about molecular transport phenomena.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to gain knowledge about molecular transport phenomena. 
 
Content 
Theory of transport phenomena from a molecular view point. [5 lectures] 
Classical concept from statistical mechanics and derivation of Boltzmann equation. [6 lectures]  
Transport theory and properties of dilute gases. [6 lectures] 
Development of transport theories and properties from Boltzmann equation. [6 lectures] 
Introduction to time correlation functions. [5 lectures] 
 
Text Book 
1. Deen W. M., 1998, Analysis of Transport Phenomena, Oxford University Press, New York. 
2. Bird. R. B., Stewart, W. E. and Lightfoot, E. N., 2006, Transport Phenomena, 2nd edition, John Wiley & Sons. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Slattery J.C., 1999, Advanced Transport Phenomena, Cambridge University Press.  
2. Leal L. G., 2010. Advanced Transport Phenomena: Fluid mechanics and convective transport processes, 

Cambridge University Press.  
3. Ramachandran, P. A. 2014. "Advanced Transport Phenomena", Cambridge University Press. 

 
Online Learning Materials 
1. R. Nagarajan, Advanced Transport Phenomena, NPTEL Course Material, Chemical Engineering, IIT Madras, 

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103106068/# 
2. V. Kumaran,  Fundamentals of Transport Processes, NPTEL Course Material,  Department of Chemical 

Engineering, IIsc Bangalore, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/108/103108099/ 
 

 
  

54 
 



Title Fluid-Like Structures and Self-Assembling Systems  Number CHL4XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2-0-0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech, Dual Degree Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide background on basic concepts of Micelles, Bilayers and Biological Membranes. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1.  Gain fundamental understanding of intermolecular forces present in Self-Assembly and fluid-like structures. 
2.  Learn about the importance of intermolecular forces in molecular modeling of Micelles, Bilayers and Biological 

Membranes 
 
Contents 
Thermodynamic Principles of Self-Assembly: Introduction, Fundamental thermodynamics (2 Lectures), Conditions 
for formation of aggregates, Critical micelle concentration (2 Lectures), Infinite aggregates versus finite aggregates, 
Size distribution of self-assembled structures (3 Lectures), More complex amphiphilic structures, Effect of 
interactions between aggregates (3 Lectures). [10 Lectures] 
Aggregation of Amphiphilic Molecules: Introduction, Optimal head group area, Geometric Packing Considerations 
(2 Lectures), Spherical Micelles, Non-spherical and Cylindrical Micelle, Bilayers and Vesicles (3 Lectures), Factors 
affecting the changes, Curvature elasticity (2 Lectures), Biological Membranes, Membrane Lipids, Membrane 
Protein and Structure (3 Lectures). [10 Lectures] 
Interaction Between Lipid Bilayer and Biological Membrane: Introduction, Attractive van der Waals Forces, 
Electrostatic Forces (1 Lecture), Hydration Forces, Hydration Model and its Limitation (2 Lectures), Steric Forces, 
Hydrophobic Forces, Specific Interactions (2 Lectures), Interdependence of inter- and intra-membrane forces (2 
Lectures), Adhesion, Fusion (1 Lecture). [8 Lectures] 
 
Textbook 
J. N. Israelachvili, 2003, Intermolecular and Surface Forces, 2nd Edition, Academic Press. 

 
  

55 
 



Title Organic Molecules, Complexes and Polymers for Number 4XX0 
Electronics and Optoelectronics  

Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for BTech Type PE 
Prerequisite Polymer as material fractal   

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide introductory knowledge about molecules, complexes and polymers that are relevant to electronics and 
optoelectronics 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1.  Gain basic knowledge about organic materials for electronics and optoelectronics 
2.  build a foundation to pursue specialization in the area of molecular engineering and organics for electronics 

and optoelectronics 
 
Contents  
Fractal 1[14 lectures]: 
Prelude: Concept of electronic polymers, synthetic electronic polymers and their chemistry, structure-property 
of polymers (4 lectures), nano-electronic polymers, electronic polymer based-based compounds, electronic small 
molecules, electronic nanocomposites (5 lectures), electrical conductivity of electronic polymers and charge 
transport/ transfer (5 lectures)  
 
Fractal 2 [14 lectures]: 
Introduction to optoelectronic polymers: overview, optical polymers, optical electroactive polymers, organic 
photovoltaic polymers (5 lectures), properties of optical polymers, organic optoelectronic systems, emitters, 
organic photonics (5 lectures), optical amplifiers, detectors and receivers, electro-optic modulators (4 lectures) 
 
Fractal 3 [14 lectures]: 
Small Molecules and Complexes for Electronic Systems: overview, small molecules based on polycyclic 
aromatics, solution processable, small molecule dyes, donor-pi-acceptor structure (4 lectures), organic electronic 
complexes, polymer metal complexes, liquid crystalline elastomers (4 lectures), electro-viscoelastic polymers, 
electromagnetic shielding polymers (6 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
Sulaiman,K., (2020), Polymers in Organic Electronics – Polymer Selection for Electronic, Mechatronic & 
Optoelectronic Systems, 1st Edition, ChemTec Publishing 

 
  

56 
 



Title Molecular Thermodynamics Number CHL4XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 
Offered for  B.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objective 
The Instructor will provide basic knowledge about concepts, microstates of a system, statistical thermodynamics 
and classical statistical mechanics. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to gain fair knowledge of basic concepts of molecular thermodynamics, microstates of 
a system, statistical thermodynamics and classical statistical mechanics.  
 
Contents  
Review of classical thermodynamics, basic concepts, thermodynamic potential. [4 lectures] 
Microstates of a system.  [9 lectures] 
Fundamentals of statistical mechanics, postulates of statistical thermodynamics, statistical ensembles, canonical 
ensemble. [7 lectures] 
Ideal gas, Monoatomic and polyatomic ideal gases, statistical thermodynamics of ideal gases, statistical 
thermodynamics of diatomic ideal gases. [10 lectures] 
Chemical reaction equilibrium, molar heat capacities, specific heat of solids, rate of chemical reaction. [2 lectures] 
Application of molecular thermodynamics. [4 lectures] 
Introduction to classical statistical mechanics. [6 lectures] 
 
Text Book 
Hanson, R.M., Green Susan (2008) Introduction to Molecular Thermodynamics, University Science Books. 
 
Online Learning Materials 
Srabani Taraphder, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104/105/104105088/ 

 
  

57 
 



Title Biochemical Engineering Number CHL4XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for BTech Type PE 
Prerequisite    

Objectives  
The Instructor will provide basic knowledge about chemical engineering aspects of biology and biotechnology, 
kinetics of enzyme catalysis, mass transfer, bioreactors, bio-separation and manufacture of biochemical products.   
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to gain understanding of chemical engineering aspects of biology and biotechnology, 
kinetics of enzyme catalysis, mass transfer, bioreactors, bio-separation and manufacture of biochemical products.   
 
Contents  
Basics of Biology:  Overview of biotechnology [2 Lectures], diversity in microbial cells, cell constituents, chemicals 
for life. [5 Lectures] 
Kinetics of enzyme catalysis. [5 Lectures]   
Immobilized enzymes: Effects of intra and inter-phase mass transfer on enzyme kinetics. [5 Lectures]   
Major metabolic pathways: Bioenergetics, glucose metabolism, biosynthesis. [5 Lectures]   
Microbial growth: Continuum and stochastic models. [3 Lectures] 
Design, analysis and stability of bioreactors. [4 Lectures] 
Kinetics of receptor-ligand binding. [3 Lectures] 
Receptor-mediated endocytosis. [3 Lectures] 
Multiple interacting microbial population: prey-predator models. [2 Lectures] 
Bio-product recovery & bio-separations; manufacture of biochemical products. [5 Lectures] 
 
Textbooks 
1. Bailey, J.E. and Ollis, D. F. [1986] Biochemical Engineering Fundamentals, McGraw Hill Book Company.  
2. Blanch, H.W. and Clark, D.S. [1997] Biochemical Engineering, Marcel Dekker Inc.  
 
Reference Books  
Shuler, M.L. and Kargi, F. [2003] Bioprocess Engineering (Basic Concepts), Prentice Hall of India. 
 
Online Course Material 
Ritu Banerjee and saikat Chakraborty, Biochemical Engineering, IIT Kharagpur,  
https://nptel.ac.in/content/syllabus_pdf/103105054.pdf 

 
  

58 
 



Title Bioprocess Technology Number CHL4XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for BTech Type PE 
Prerequisite An introductory course on Biochemical Engineering    

Objectives  
The Instructor will provide basic knowledge about bioprocess technology, industrial importance of 
microorganisms, fermentation, industrial production of alcohol, glycerol, acetone, butanol and microbial 
production of organic acids like citric acid, vinegar etc.    
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to gain knowledge about industrial importance of microorganisms, fermentation, 
industrial production of alcohol, glycerol, acetone, butanol and microbial production of organic acids like citric 
acid, vinegar etc.    
 
Contents  
Industrial importance of microorganisms. [5 lectures] 
Substrates for fermentation – major elements, minor elements, vitamins, hormones, trace elements and growth 
factors. [7 lectures] 
Alcoholic fermentation – distilled alcohol, wine and beer. [6 lectures] 
Baker’s yeast production. [2 lectures] 
Production of glycerol, acetone and butanol. [6 lectures] 
Microbial production of organic acids – citric acid, gluconic acid, itaconic acid, gibberellic acid, lactic acid and 
vinegar. [8 lectures]  
Production of industrial enzymes – amylases, proteases, invertases, pectinases, cellulases; mushroom production. 
[8 lectures] 
 
Textbooks  
1. Shuler, M.L. and Kargi, F. [2003] Bioprocess Engineering: Basic Concepts, Prentice Hall of India 
2. Mansi El-Mansi and C. F. A. Bryce, C.F.A., Fermentation Microbiology and Biotechnology  
 
Reference Books  
1. Stanbury, P.F., Whitaker, A., Hall, S. Principles of Fermentation Technology  
2. Friberg, Stig, Handbook of Food and Beverage Fermentation Technology (Food Science and Technology)  

 
Online Course Material 
Patel, N.K., https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/106/103106109/ 

 
  

59 
 



Title Bio-Transport Phenomena Number CHL6XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 2-0-0 (2) 
Offered for  B.Tech   Type PE 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge about momentum, heat and mass transfer in bio-systems and their analogous behavior. 
2.  Train the student to create bio-engineering knowledge using the transport phenomena approach with special focus 

on combined transport problems. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify and analyze the properties and mechanisms of momentum, energy and mass transport. 
2. Analyze, design and solve problems combining these transport phenomena in bio-engineering. 
 
Contents 
Transport processes across cell membrane:  Transport mechanisms, transport by diffusion, filtration and osmosis, 
facilitated diffusion, vesicular transport, bulk transport, co-transport, membrane transport, transport of virus in cells. 
[8 lectures]    
Intracellular Transport: Molecular mechanism of intracellular transport, membrane structure, transport of proteins, 
forms of endocytosis and intracellular transport, factors affecting intracellular transport. [8 lectures]    
Models for blood flow: Non-newtonian fluid model, steady flow in tubes, pulsatile flow in a rigid tube, pulsatile flow 
in an elastic tube, blood flow dynamics in arteries and veins, heart-valve hemodynamics. [7 lectures]    
Air flow in the lungs: Mechanics of breathing, gas exchange and transport. [3 lectures]   
Application of the principle of bio-transport phenomenon in medical device development. [2 lectures] 
 
Text Books 
1. Truskey, G.A., Yuan, F., Katz, D.F., (2009) Transport Phenomena in Biological Systems, 2nd ed, Prentice Hall, New 

Jersey. 
2. Bird, R.B., Stewart, W.E. and Lightfoot, E.N., (2006), Transport Phenomena, 2nd ed., Wiley India. 

 
Reference Books  
1. Welty, C. E., Wicks, R. E. ,Wilson, G. L. Rorrer,(2007), Fundamentals of Momentum, Heat, and Mass Transfer. 5th 

ed., Wiley India Pvt. Ltd.  
2. Geankoplis C.J., 2004, Transport Processes and Separation Process Principles, 4th Ed., Prentice-Hall of India. 
2. Brodkey, R.S., Hershey H.C., 2003, Basic concepts in transport phenomena, a unified  approach. Vol 1, Brodkey 

Publishing. 
3. Thompson, W.J.,(2000) Introduction to Transport Phenomena, Prentice Hall, 2000. 
 
Online Course Material  
Transport Phenomena’ by Prof. S.K. Gupta, NPTEL: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/102/103102024/  

 
  

60 
 



Title Biochemical Separation Processes Number CHL400X 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 2-0-0 (2) 
Offered for  B.Tech.   Type PE 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge in biochemical separation. 
2. Train the student in separation processes in biochemical engineering. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand different aspects of biochemical separation. 
2. Analyze the different aspects of separation processes in the field of biochemical engineering.  
 
Contents 
Introduction: Role of separation process in biochemical industry. [2 lectures] 
Design variables and parameters: feed, product, operating conditions, density, viscosity, diffusion coefficients, mass 
transfer data. [4 lectures] 
Different processes and methods viz. vacuum distillation, adsorption, extraction, membrane processes etc. [8 lectures] 
Process design [8 lectures] 
Performance evaluation [4 lectures] 
Case studies [2 lectures] 
 
Text Books 
1. Bajpai, P., Bajpai, P.K., Dochain, D. and Dutta, N.N. Biotreatment, Downstream Processing and Modelling 

(Advances in Biochemical Engineering / Biotechnology)  
2. Blanch, H.W. and Clark, D.S. [1997] Biochemical Engineering, Marcel Dekker Inc.  
 
Reference Books  
1. Atkinson, B. and Mavituna, F. Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology Handbook  
2. Bailey, J.E. and Ollis, D. F. [1986] Biochemical Engineering Fundamentals, McGraw Hill Book Company. 
 
Online Course Material  
 https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/105/103105060/ 

 
  

61 
 



Title Bioreactors Number CHL400X 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for  B.Tech   Type PE 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge about reactor design for biochemical engineering systems and scaleup. 
2.  Train the student in bioreactor configurations, design and analysis.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.Design the reactors for the biochemical engineering systems. 
2. Analyze the bioreactors.  
 
Contents 
Introduction: Bioprocess overview, Common types of bioreactors, sterilization, thermal sterilization. [5 lectures] 
Thermodynamics and rate concept of biochemical engineering systems, enzyme bioreactors, enzyme kinetics. 
measurement principles and methods. [5 lectures]     
Bioreactor configuration: batch reactor, continuous stirred-tank reactor (CSTR), tubular reactor, plug flow reactor, [5 
lectures] packed bed reactor, solid state bioreactors, photobioreactor, air lift, fluidized bed reactor, membrane 
bioreactor. [5 lectures]     
Kinetic expression: Monod’s equation and its generalization. [3 lectures]     
Bioreactor design: Basic calculation; Bioreactor design and optimum operations– mixing characteristics; [6 lectures] 
residence time distribution in bioreactors and non-ideality, concentration distribution and temperature distribution. 
[6 lectures]    
Analysis of multiple interacting microbial populations: Biological system parameters; processes involving microbial 
flocs; bioreactors containing microbial films. [3 lectures]    
Basic concept of scale-up of bioreactors and case studies. [4 lectures]    
 
Text Books 
1. Bailey, J.E. and Ollis, D. F. [1986] Biochemical Engineering Fundamentals, McGraw Hill Book Company.  
2. Blanch, H.W. and Clark, D.S. [1997] Biochemical Engineering, Marcel Dekker Inc.  
 
Reference Books  
1. Atkinson, B. and Mavituna, F. Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology Handbook  
2. Aiba, S., Humphrey, A.E. and Millos, N.F. Biochemical Engineering  
3. Asenjo, J.A. Bioreactor System Design (Biotechnology and Bioprocessing Series)  

 
Online Course Material  
 Suraishkumar, IIT Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102/106/102106053/ 

 
  

62 
 



Title Introduction to Internet of Things (IoT) Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1–0–0 [1] 
Offered for 

M. Tech. 1st Type Compulsory 
year 

Prerequisite    

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide overview of applications of IoT and relevant technologies 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Identify and integrate different components required for IoT applications 
 
Contents 
Introduction to IoT: Sensing, Actuation, Basics of IoT Networking (2 Lectures)  
IoT Architecture, Communication Protocols for IoT (2 Lectures) 
Sensor Networks: Wireless Sensor Network, Sensor nodes (2 Lectures) 
Machine to machine Communication: Introduction, Node types and M2M Applications, Integration of Sensors 
and Actuators for Implementation of IoT (4 Lectures) 
Introduction to Cloud, Fog, and Edge Computing, Smart cities and Smart homes, Industrial IoT (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook 
Kamal, R., (2017), Internet of Things - Architecture and Design Principles, 1st Edition, Mcgraw Hill. 

Preparatory Course Material 
Misra, S., Introduction to Internet of Things, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105166/ 

 
  

63 
 



Title Sensors and IoT Lab Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 
Offered for Type Compulsory 

M. Tech. 1st year 

Prerequisite    

Objective 
1. To introduce students with sensors fabrication 
2. To familiarize students with measurement instruments like Spectrum and Vector Network Analyzer 
3. To introduce students with various kits and components required for IoT applications 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Familiarization with sensor fabrication process and characterization 
2. Handling high frequency measurement instruments 
3. Implementation of various circuits required to build a transceiver 
 
Contents 

The lab course will be dependent on the various core and elective components of the program. There will be a 
scope for modifying the contents depending on the recent developments in technology. Experiments from some 
of the following topics will be part of this lab. 
1. Implementation of Signal Conditioning Circuits 
2. Implementation of IoT components using Hardware/Software 
3. Sensor interfacing using off-the-shelf components 
4. Sensor Design, Fabrication and Characterization (Part of this in winter internship) 
5. RF components characterization; Antennas and RF amplifiers 
6. Implementation of real time examples of IoT using Embedded Systems 
7. Selected experiments from Communication Systems 
8. Recent topics of interest 

 
  

64 
 



Title Industry 4.0 Applications i Number MEL7XX0 
n Manufacturing Systems 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 1-0-0-0 [1] 
Offered for  Type Program Core 
Prerequisite  

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide brief understanding about Industry 4.0 concepts in manufacturing systems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to appreciate: 
1. current trends at system level in manufacturing organizations 
2. the importance of industry 4.0 concepts at manufacturing systems 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Manufacturing systems (2 Lecture) 
Automated Manufacturing Systems: Concept of Group Technology and cellular manufacturing, Flexible 

Manufacturing Systems, Lean Manufacturing, Agile Manufacturing (6 Lectures) 
Industry 4.0 for Manufacturing Systems: Agent Based Manufacturing, Cloud Based Manufacturing (6 Lectures) 

Reference Books 
1. Talavage J., and Hanman R. G, Flexible Manufacturing Systems in Practice, Taylor and Francis 

2. Gunasekaran A., Agile Manufacturing: 21st Century Competitive Strategy, Elsevier 
3. Wang L., and Vincent W. X., Cloud Based Cyber-Physical Systems in Manufacturing, Springer 
 
Self-Learning Material 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105195/10 

 
  

65 
 



Title Chemometrics Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering,  L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for  B.Tech., M.Tech., M.Tech.-Ph.D. Type Programme Elective  
Prerequisite basics of chemical engineering    
Objective 
The instructor will:  
Impart knowledge of modern methods of analyzing chemical data.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the: 
Comprehensive knowledge of the modern methods of reducing and analyzing chemical data.  
 
Contents  
Prelude to chemometrics: Introduction and history of Chemometrics, factorial analysis; reverse, surface and mixture 
design; correlograms and time series analysis; sequential methods, Pattern recognition. [6 lectures]  
Calibration: introduction to multivariable calibration, selectivity problems, statistical problems in calibration, 
Univariate calibration, multiple linear and principal components regression, model validation, outlier detection. [6 
lectures] 
Evolutionary signals and process analysis in chemical plants: exploratory data analysis and processing, determining 
composition, resolution pre-processing, composition of sequential data, screening. [6 lectures] 
Derivatives in Spectroscopy: Theoretical and computed derivatives, derivative approximation, calibrating with 
derivatives, spectroscopic monitoring of reactions, kinetics and multivariable model, online spectroscopy. [6 lecture]  
General Data Analysis: simple analysis of variance and experimental design (one-way, two-way with and without 
replicates, randomized and blocked designs). [6 lectures]  
Computational methods: control structures for selection and iteration, functions, array data structure, numerical 
methods for data analysis. [6 lectures] 
Machine learning in Chemical plants: Introduction, basics of decision trees, combining multiple learner, 
reinforcement learning, experimental design and analysis. [6 lectures] 
 
Text Book 
1. Richard G. Brereton, 2003, Chemometrics: Data Analysis for the Laboratory and Chemical Plant, Wiley 
2. Howard Mark, Jerry Workman, Jr, 2018, Chemometrics in Spectroscopy, Elsevier Academic Press. 
3. Ethem Alpaydin, 2004, Introduction to Machine Learning, MIT Press.  
 
Reference Books 
1. Vandeginste, B.G.M., Massart, D.L., Buydens, L.M.C., Jong, de D., Lewi, P.J., Smeyers-Verbeke, J., 1998, 

Handbook of Chemometrics and Qualimetrics: Part B, Elsevier. 
2. Kreyszig, Erwin, 2014, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, John Wiley and Sons, 10th Edition. 
3. Harald Martens, Tormod Næs, 1989, Multivariate Calibration, John Wiley & Sons. 
4. Richard G. Brereton, 2007, Applied Chemometrics for Scientists, John Wiley & Sons. 

 
  

66 
 



Title Artificial Intelligence in Chemical Reactor Control Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech, M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Elective 
Prerequisite Material and Energy Balance, Chemical Reaction   

Engineering, Scientific Computations 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide background on AI in chemical reactor design 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1.  Gain fundamental understanding of the application of AI in chemical reactor design. 
2.  Learn to develop AI model equations, approaches for chemical reactors. 
3.  Learn to write basic codes of AI control for chemical reactors. 
 
Contents 
Reactor Models: Review of Mixing Problem, Batch Reactors (1 Lecture), CSTR, PFR, Bioreactor (1 Lecture), Non-
isothermal reactors (1 Lecture), Fluidised bed and Packed bed reactors (1 Lecture), Slurry Reactor, Cholette’s 
Model (1 Lecture), Non-Ideal Reactors (1 Lecture). [6 Lectures] 
 
Basic Concepts of Filters: Bayesian Estimators, Luenberger Observer (4 Lectures), Kalman Observer, Extended 
Kalman Filter (4 Lectures), Unscented Kalman Filter, Particle Filter, Moving Horizon Estimation (5 Lectures), 
Multi-rate Estimations (3 Lectures), Multi-rate Observer (4 Lectures). [20 Lectures] 
 
Case Studies: Qualitative Modelling of Chemical Reaction Systems (3 Lectures), Exothermic Batch Chemical 
Reactor Automation via Expert System (3 Lectures), State Estimation in a Batch Suspension Polymerization Reactor 
(3 Lectures), Dynamic Real-Time Optimization of Transitions in Industrial Polymerization Processes using 
Solution Models (2 Lectures), On-Line Nonlinear Model-Based Estimation and Control of a Polymer Reactor (2 
Lectures), Recursive Estimation in Constrained Nonlinear Dynamical Systems (3 Lectures). [16 Lectures] 
 
Experiments 
1. Simulation of CSTR 
2. Simulation of PFR 
3. Simulation of PBR 
4. Simulation of Nonisothermal Reactors 
5. Simulation of Slurry Reactor 
6. Simulation of Bioreactor 
7. Simulating Cholette’s Model 
8. Luenberger Observer 
9. Kalman Filter 
10. Extended Kalman Filter 
11. Control of Isothermal & Non-isothermal Batch Reactors 
12. Control of Polymer Reactor 

 
Textbooks 
1. Fogler, H. S., (1992), Elements of Chemical Reaction Engineering, Prentice-Hall 
2. Michael L. Mavrovouniotis, 1990, Artificial Intelligence in Process Engineering, Academic Press 
 
References 
1. Mohammad Shahrokhi and Mohammad Ali Fanaei, 2001, State Estimation in a Batch Suspension 

Polymerization Reactor, Iranian Polymer Journal, Vol. 10, Number 3 
2. J.V. Kadam, B. Srinivasan, W. Marquardt, D. Bonvin, Dynamic Real-Time Optimization of Transitions in 

Industrial Polymerization Processes using Solution Models 

67 
 



3. Rajendra K. Mutha, William R. Cluett, Alexander Penlidis, 1997, On-Line Nonlinear Model-Based 
Estimation and Control of a Polymer Reactor, AIChE Journal, Vol. 43, Number 11 
Pramod Vachhani, Raghunathan Rengaswamy, Vikrant Gangwal, 2005, Recursive Estimation in 
Constrained Nonlinear Dynamical Systems, AIChE Journal, Vol. 51, Number 3 

 
  

68 
 



Title Nanosensors Number MEL7XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech, M. Tech and PhD Type Open Elective 
Prerequisite    

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide understanding about the importance of nanoscale materials for sensing applications. 
2. Teach approaches for fabrication and characterizing of sensors based on nanomaterials. 
3. Enhance critical, creative and innovative thinking to tailor nanomaterials for specific application. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design and fabricate nanomaterial based sensors. 
2. Undertake interdisciplinary research and exploit nanomaterials for new sensing applications. 
 
Contents 
Sensor types: Displacement, position and proximity sensors (3 lectures); velocity, motion, force and pressure 
sensors (4 lectures); components and classification of sensors (1 lecture); parameters for sensor characterization 
(1 lecture); sensor arrays (1 lecture). 
Nanostructures and Nanoparticles: Nanostructures (1 lectures); nanostructure fabrication (top down and bottom 
up approach) (3 lectures); characterization of nanostructures using different techniques (Atomic Force 
Microscopy, Scanning Electron Microscopy, Tunneling Electron Microscopy) (3 lectures); nanoparticles (types 
and shapes) (1 lecture); nanoparticle production, shape control, functionalization and application (2 lectures); 
nanowires (properties, sensing mechanism, fabrication, and devices) (4 lectures); quantum dots (1 lecture). 
Carbon nanotubes/nanofibres (CNT/CNF) and other Nanosensors: CNT structure, properties, synthesis, 
functionalization (3 lectures); CNT/CNF based sensors (single layer/multi-layer) (2 lectures); nanostructure, 
nanoparticles, nanowire and nanofibre based metal oxide sensors (3 lectures); flexible sensors and electronic skin 
(2 lectures); Nanosensors in engineering applications: optical, chemical, mechanical, electrochemical, mass 
sensitive, biosensors, mechanical sensors in liquid solution, thin film sensors (7 lectures). 
 
Reference Books 
1. Khanna, V. K., (2011), Nanosensors: Physical, Chemical, and Biological, CRC Press. 
2. Atta, N. F., (2014), Nanosensors: Materials and Technologies. IFSA Publishing. 

3. Meyyappan, M., (2004), Carbon Nanotubes: Science and Applications, 1st Edition, CRC Press. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112108092 
2. https://www.coursera.org/learn/nanotechnology/home 

 
  

69 
 



Title Data Analytics in Process Modelling and Number CHL7XX0 
Simulation  

Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 2-0-2 (3) 
Offered for  M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree in Chemical Type Elective 

Engineering 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Impart knowledge about the mathematical modelling of physical systems, data analytics and introduce flow-

sheet simulation as a tool for process analysis, enabling systems approach in modelling of a process with 
interaction among several unit processes and unit operations. 

2. Provide insight into development of simulators to do steady-state and dynamic simulation.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
Gain in-depth knowledge of the data analytics and mathematical modelling of physical systems and process with 
interaction among several unit operations and have insight into development of simulators to do steady-state and 
dynamic simulation.  
 
Contents  
Introduction to mathematical modelling: lumped vs distributed parameter systems, process  
synthesis, design, simulation & analysis, Modelling of various chemical systems covering  
heat, mass, momentum transfer, and reactions, Sequential and simultaneous modular  
approaches for flow-sheet Simulation (9 lectures). 
Equation solving approaches: Partitioning, Decomposition, Disjointing, PTM, SWS-, Steward-, and Rudd 
Algorithms, Direct Methods, Pivoting, Iterative methods, BTF, BBTF, Block Back       
Substitution, BTS. (4 lectures) 
Decomposition of networks: Tearing algorithms, digraph, MCN, signal flow graph, B&M  
algorithm, BTA, K&S algorithm, M&H-1 & -2 algorithms, and related problems, Convergence Promotion. (6 
lectures) 
Data analysis: Sources and data banks of physical & thermodynamic properties,  Modularity & Routing, Specific 
purpose simulation, Dynamic simulation (9 lectures)  
Process Modelling and Simulation Design Lab (28 hrs) 
Modelling of Heat exchange equipment (2) 
Modular approaches for flow-sheet Simulation (4) 
Process simulation using MATLAB (6) 
Process simulation using ASPEN (6) 
Distillation with reflux, reboiler and condenser (6) 
Case studies: Process simulation of industrial scale processes and validation (4) 
 
Text Book 
Jana, A.K. Chemical Process Modelling & Computer Simulation, 2nd ed., PHI Learning, 2011 
 
Reference Books 
1. Babu, B.V. Process Plant Simulation, Oxford University Press, India, 2004. 
2. Luyben, W.L. Process Modelling, Simulation & Control for Chemical Engineers, 2nd ed., McGraw Hill, 1990 
 
Online Course Material  
Agrawal, V.K., Process Modelling and Simulation, NPTEL Course Material,  Department of Chemical Engineering, 
IIT Roorkee  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/107/103107096/ 

 
 
  

70 
 



Title Artificial Intelligence-1 Number CSXXX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for Type Compulsory 

M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year 

Prerequisite None   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Cover various paradigms that come under the broad umbrella of AI, with some of them being covered in depth 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Develop an understanding of where and how AI can be used 
 
Contents 
Introduction (1 lecture) 
Propositional logic (8 lectures) 
Search: Uninformed strategies (BFS, DFS, Dijkstra), Informed strategies (A* search, heuristic functions, hill-
climbing), Adversarial search (Minimax algorithm, Alpha-beta pruning) (10 lectures) 
Predicate logic: Knowledge representation, Resolution (6 lectures) 
Rule-based systems: Natural language parsing, Context free grammar (3 lectures) 
Constraint satisfaction problems (4 lectures) 
Planning: State space search, Planning Graphs, Partial order planning (4 lectures) Uncertain Reasoning: 
Probabilistic reasoning, Bayesian Networks, Dempster-Shafer theory, Fuzzy logic (6 lectures) 
 
Textbook 
Russel,S., and Norvig,P., (2015), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd Edition, Prentice Hall 
 
Reference Books 
Research literature 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Department of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley, 

http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD52D2B739E4D1C5F 
2. NPTEL: Artificial Intelligence, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105077/ 

 
  

71 
 



Title Machine Learning-1 Number CSXXXX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for Type Compulsory 

M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year 

Prerequisite None   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide motivation and understanding of the need and importance of Machine Learning in today’s world 
2. Provide details about various algorithms in Machine Learning 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop a sense of Machine Learning in the modern context, and independently work on problems 
relating to Machine Learning 

2. Design and program efficient algorithms related to Machine Learning, train models, conduct 
experiments, and deliver ML-based applications 

 
Contents 
(fractal 1) Introduction: Motivation, Different types of learning, Linear regression, Logistic regression (2 lectures) 
Gradient Descent: Introduction, Stochastic Gradient Descent, Subgradients, Stochastic Gradient 
Descent for risk minimization (2 lectures) 

Support Vector Machines: Hard SVM, Soft SVM, Optimality conditions, Duality, Kernel trick, Implementing Soft 
SVM with Kernels (4 lectures) 

Decision Trees: Decision Tree algorithms, Random forests (2 lectures) 
Nearest Neighbour: k-nearest neighbour, Curse of dimensionality (1 lecture) 
Neural Networks: Feedforward neural networks, Expressive power of neural networks, SGD and 
Backpropagation (3 lectures) 

(fractal 2) Clustering: Linkage-based clustering algorithms, k-means algorithm, Spectral clustering (2 lectures) 
Dimensionality reduction: Principal Component Analysis, Random projections, Compressed sensing (2 lectures) 
Generative Models: Maximum likelihood estimator, Naive Bayes, Linear Discriminant Analysis, Latent 
variables and Expectation-maximization algorithm, Bayesian learning (4 lectures) Feature Selection and 
Generation: Feature selection, Feature transformations, Feature learning (3 lectures) 

Model selection and validation: Validation for model selection, k-fold cross-validation, Training-Validation-
Testing split, Regularized loss minimization (3 lectures) 

(fractal 3) Statistical Learning Framework: PAC learning, Agnostic PAC learning, Bias-complexity tradeoff, No 
free lunch theorem, VC dimension, Structural risk minimization, Adaboost (7 lectures) 

Foundations of Deep Learning: DNN, CNN, RNN, Autoencoders (7 lectures) 

Textbook 
Shalev-Shwartz,S., Ben-David,S., (2014), Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory to Algorithms, 
Cambridge University Press 
 
Reference Books 
Mitchell Tom (1997). Machine Learning, Tata McGraw-Hill 
 
Self Learning Material 
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, 
https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 

 
  

72 
 



Title Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) Process Number CH7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering  L-T-P [C] 1-0-0 
Offered for B. Tech./ M.Tech./M.Tech.-Ph.D./ Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Thermodynamics   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide understanding of Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) cycles, hybrid OTEC systems and 
technological challenges.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the: 
1. 1. Proper knowledge about Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) cycles and hybrid OTEC technologies. 
2. 2. Ability to understand OTEC design challenges. 
 
vi Contents  
Ocean as a Heat Engine: Concepts of ocean thermal energy, Favourable temperature difference, OTEC history. (2 
lectures) 
OTEC Cycles: Closed OTEC cycles, Open OTEC cycle, Flow diagrams, Comparison of OTEC Cycles, Products of 
OTEC: electricity, desalinated water, cold water for air-conditioning etc., Hybrid OTEC systems. (6 lectures)   
OTEC System Design: System components, Heat exchangers, evaporators, Pumps, Turbines, Piping, Platform 
concepts, Dual Purpose OTEC Plants, Challenges, Case studies. (6 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
Takahashi, Patrick and Trenka, Andrew, (1996) Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion, Ist ed., Wiley. 
 
Reference Books  
Lockerby,R.W., (1981) Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC), US Department of Energy, United States. 
 

 
  

73 
 



Title Microfluidic Fuel Cells Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 1-0-0 

Offered for B. TECH, MTECH, MTECH-PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite none   

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide in-depth knowledge about the fundamentals of microfluidics devices as fuel cells. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have: 
Detailed understanding of Microfluidic fuel cells. 
 
Contents  
Microfluidic cells: Introduction, concept, classification, and challenges, categories, Thermodynamic and kinetic of 
microfluidic fuel cells, electrochemical principles and transport. [7 lectures] 
Designs: Microfabrication techniques, 2D, 3D electrodes in microfluidic fuel cells, performance evolution. [3 

lectures]  
Microfluidics devices: co-laminar streaming, fuel cells with biocatalysts, gas diffusion electrodes, microfluidics 
redox batteries, cell arrays and Stacks. [4 lectures] 
 
Textbook  
Erik Kjeang, 2014, Microfluidic Fuel Cells and Batteries, Springer. 
 
Reference Books  
 Research Articles from different journals.  

 
  

74 
 



Title Catalysis for Energy  Number CY6XX0 
Department Chemistry L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. To give a overview about defining a roadmap for the role of catalysis in energy production 
2. Relate catalysis with fuel cells, hydrogen production and storage, methane storage and industrial catalysis 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the role and the possibilities of catalysis in the production of new energy carriers and in the utilization 

of different energy sources.  
2. to go beyond conventional application identifying new developments that may lead to breakthroughs in the 

production of alternative energy. 
 

Contents 
Catalysis: Introduction to heterogeneous catalysis, including models of surface reactivity, surface equilibria, kinetics 
of surface reactions, electronic and geometrical effects in heterogeneous catalysis.(Lectures 14) 
Catalytic reactions and application: Trends in reactivity, catalyst structure and composition, electro-catalysis and 
photo-catalysis.(Lectures 12) 
Selected applications and challenges in energy transformations: fuel cells, hydrogen production, OER and HER 
reactions, CO2 oxidation, methane and hydrogen storage and industrial catalysis. (Lecture 14) 
 
Textbooks  
Hanefeld, U, Lefferts, L. (2018) Catalysis: An Integrated Textbook for Students, 1st Edition, Wiley  

 
Reference Books:  
1. Okada, Tatsuhiro, Kaneko, Masao, (2009), Molecular Catalysts for Energy Conversion Springer. 
2. Guczi, László, Erdôhelyi, András, Catalysis for Alternative Energy Generation, Springer. 
3. Pierluigi Barbaro, Claudio Bianchini, Catalysis for Sustainable Energy Production, Wiley 
 
Self Learning Material 
Xile Hu, Angamuthu, R and Bera, J. K., Catalysis for Energy Storage, GIAN Course material, Indian Institute of 
Technology Kanpur, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LvTfsIAI-VE 
 

 
  

75 
 



Title Advanced Waste Water Treatment  Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for  B.Tech., M.Tech., M.Tech.-Ph.D. Type PE 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The instructor will:  
1. Impart comprehensive knowledge of industrial and municipal wastewater. 
2. Discuss mechanism and methodologies for wastewater treatment. 
3. Discuss case studies 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the: 
1. Comprehensive knowledge of wastewater treatment. 
2. Knowledge of advanced methodologies such as waste water management, recycle and reuse. 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Waste water engineering: an overview, characterisation of waste water and monitoring of industrial 
and municipal waste water, environmental impacts of waste water constituents. (4 lectures) 
Conventional Waste Water Treatment: Existing unit operations and processes, basic philosophy of water treatment 
plants(4 lectures); physio-chemical treatment methods: (i) Screening, (ii) conventional filtration (iii) coagulation, (iv) 
flocculation, (v) floatation (vi) Clari-flocculation (vii) sedimentation, (viii) sand filtration, etc(6 lectures). [10 lectures] 
Aerobic and Anaerobic Suspended and Attached Growth Waste Water Treatment Processes: Aerated lagoon, 
activated sludge systems, trickling filter,(4 lectures) sequential batch reactor, fluidized bed bioreactors, Up-flow 
Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB) and hybrid Up-flow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB) reactors, bio-towers(4 
lectures). [8 lectures] 
Advanced Treatment Processes: Membrane Filtration, reverse osmosis, ultrafiltration, nanofiltration and 
electrodialysis(3 lectures); wet air oxidation, adsorption and ion-exchange(2 lectures); Wet-land and root-zone 
treatment of industrial and municipal wastes; Design of sludge drying beds, thermal and biological processes for 
sludge and land fillings(5 lectures). Membrane Reactors, New Technologies for Waste Water Disinfection(2 lectures). 
[12 lectures] 
Water Recycling and Reuse: Different unit operations for water recycling depending on end use(3 lectures), recovery 
of valuables from waste water, zero liquid discharge (ZLD)(5 lectures). [8 lectures] 
 
Waste Water Treatment Design Lab (28 hrs) 
Clarifier 
Aerator 
Sand filtration system 
Municipal waste water system 
Grey water treatment system 
Sewage water treatment system 
Industrial waste water systems 
Pond water treatment  
 
Text Book 
1. Burton F.L., Tchobanoglous G., Stensel H.D., 2017, Waste Water Engineering Treatment and Reuse, 4 thed.,Tata 

McGraw-Hill. 
2. Arceivala S.J. and Asolekar S.R., 2007, Wastewater Treatment for Pollution Control and Reuse, 3rd Ed., Tata 

McGraw Hill. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Henze M., van-Loosdrecht M.C.M., Ekama G.A. and Brdjanovic D., 2008, Biological Wastewater Treatment: 

Principles, Modelling and Design, IWA publishing. 
2. Sincero A.P. and Sincero G.A., 1996, Environmental Engineering – A Design Approach, Prentice-Hall. 

 
 

76 
 



Online Course Material 
Tiwari M K, Wastewater treatment and recycling, NPTEL course material, Department of Civil Engineering, IIT 
Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105105178/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

77 
 



Title Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)  Number CHL7XX0 
Department (i) Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

(ii) Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 
Offered for  B.Tech., M.Tech., M.Tech.-Ph.D. Type PE  
Prerequisite    
Objective 
The instructor will:  
1. Impart the knowledge to the students with the methods of assessment of environmental impacts due to 

developmental and industrial activities.  
2. Expose the students with the EIA regulations and EMP.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the: 
1. In-depth knowledge of the methods of assessment of environmental impacts due to developmental and industrial 

activities.  
2. In-depth knowledge of EIA regulations and EMP.  

 
Contents  
Introduction to EIA; definitions and concepts(2 lectures); evolution of EIAhistorical development of EIA; forecasting 
environmental changes;(5 lectures) strategic environmental assessment;environmental clearance procedure(4 
lectures). [11 lectures] 
EIA documentation and processes; preliminary stages of EIA; project types and screening;(5 lectures) impact 
prediction; evaluation and mitigation(4 lectures); EIA monitoring and auditing(2 lectures). [11 lectures] 
EIA regulations; TOR for EIAs; EIA at regional level(3 lectures), sectoral level, and policy level;(3 lectures) sustainable 
development; Environmental Management Plan (EMP)(5 lectures). [11 lectures] 
Future strategies (4 lectures) and EIA case studies (5 lectures). [9 lectures] 
 
Text Book 
Canter, L., Environmental Impact Assessment, McGraw Hill, New York, 1996. 
 
Reference Books 
1. World Bank, ‘Environmental Assessment Source Book’, Environment Dept., 
Washington D.C., 1991. 
2. Rau, G.J. and Wooten, C.D., Environmental Impact Analysis Handbook, McGraw Hill, New York, 1980. 

Preventive environmental management. 
 

Online Course Material 
Dubey B K, Introduction to Environmental Engineering and Science – Fundamental and Sustainability Concepts, 
NPTEL course material, Department of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/127105018/ 
 

 
  

78 
 



Title Hydrogen and Methanol Economy Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for MTECH, MTECH-PhD, PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite none   

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide in-depth knowledge about Hydrogen and Methanol production, storage, their    
     Utility and infrastructure development. 
2. Impart knowledge about the economic and environmental viewpoint of using Hydrogen and Methanol as fuel 

sources.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have: 
1.  Proper knowledge about Hydrogen and Methanol production and related issues. 
2.  Economic view point of Hydrogen and Methanol as fuel and the related challenges & opportunities. 
 
Contents  
Hydrogen and methanol as fuels: General aspects, Prelude to the energy systems, Hydrogen and Methanol as 
energy sources, Future energy supply, Economy and Environment, Sustainability (6) 
Hydrogen economy: Properties, production, storage, utilization and safely, Infrastructure requirement, Hydrogen 
as a transportation fuel, Hydrogen based fuel cell. (12) 
Methanol economy: Properties, production, storage, transportation and safely, Infrastructure  
Requirement, Methanol as fuel and energy carrier, Methanol as automobile, marine and   
aviation fuel. (14) 
Challenges and opportunities: Indian and global perspectives, Domestic and transportation application, 
Affordable Technology development, Policy. (6) 
Case studies: Comparative study with other energy sources.(4)  
 
Textbook  
1.  G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert, G. K. S. Prakash,(2006), Beyond Oil and Gas: The Methanol  
    Economy, Wiley‐VCH, Weinheim, Germany. 
2.  Ball M. and Wietschel M.,(2009) The Hydrogen Economy Opportunities and Challenges,   
     Cambridge University Press. 
 
Reference Books  
1.  A. Scipioni, A. Manzardo, J. Ren, (2017) Hydrogen Economy: Supply Chain, Life Cycle    
    Analysis and Energy Transition for Sustainability, Academic Press. 
2. M. Bertau, H. Offermanns, L. Plass, F. Schmidt, H. Wernicke,(2014) Methanol: The Basic    
    Chemical and Energy Feedstock of the Future, Springer; 2014 
 

 
  

79 
 



Title Molecular Number CHL7XX0 
Engineering of Water 

Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 1-0-0 
Offered for  B.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objective 
The Instructor will provide basic knowledge about molecular science and engineering of water.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to gain knowledge about molecular science and engineering of water. 
 
Contents  
Properties of the water molecule, hydrogen bonding, clusters, supercritical water, condensed phases, solutions, 
confined and interfacial water, clathrates, and nucleation. [7 lectures] 
 
Methods of water purification, water splitting and fuel cells, water in atmospheric and climate science, and water 
in biology, health and medicine. [7 lectures] 
 
Text Book 
Leach, R. (2001) Molecular Modelling: Principles and Applications, Pearson Education. 
 
Online Learning Materials 
Srabani Taraphder, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104/105/104105088/ 

 
  

80 
 



Title Polymers for Electronics and Optoelectronics Number 7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2-0-0 
Offered for BTech Type PE 
Prerequisite Polymer as material fractal   

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Detailed know-how about polymers for electronics and optoelectronics 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
1.  Gain detailed knowledge about polymers that are relevant to Electronics and Optoelectronics 
2.  Learn about printed circuit board technology based on polymers 
 
Contents  
Fractal 1 [14 lectures]: 
Introduction: basics of electronic polymers and their chemistry, structure-property of polymers (3 lectures), 
electronic nanocomposites, electrical charge transport/ transfer theories (4 lectures), optoelectronic polymers, 
optical polymers, optical electroactive polymers, organic photovoltaic polymers (3 lectures), basics of 
piezoelectricity, microelectronics, optoelectronics (4 lectures)  
 
Fractal 2 [14 lectures]: 
Properties of Organic Electronic Structures: band gap and excitation energy, absorption wavelength, 
transparency, optical absorption, birefringence, optical transmission, haze, polarizability, photoconductivity, 
optical emission, luminescence (4 lectures) 
Polymers in Organic Printed Circuit Boards (PCBs): Overview, polymers for traditional PCBs, prepreg, single-
sided and double sided circuit boards, multilayered PCBs, flexible PCBs (5 lectures), rigid-flex, 3D PCBs, molded 
interconnect devices, smart textile PCBs (5 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
Sulaiman,K., (2020), Polymers in Organic Electronics – Polymer Selection for Electronic, Mechatronic & 
Optoelectronic Systems, 1st Edition, ChemTec Publishing 

 
  

81 
 



Title Molecular Simulations Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 2-0-0 
Offered for  B.Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objective 
The Instructor will provide basic knowledge about statistical mechanics, molecular dynamics and introduce the 
Monte Carlo method.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to gain knowledge about: 
1. Statistical mechanics and molecular dynamics; and  
2. Monte Carlo method. 
 
Contents  
Statistical Mechanics: Basics of statistical mechanics, ideal monoatomic gas, canonical ensemble, grand-canonical 
and isobaric-isothermal ensemble. [8 lectures] 
 
Molecular dynamics: Basics of molecular dynamics, force field and integrating algorithms, periodic box and 
minimum image convention, non-bonded interactions, estimation of pure component properties. [10 lectures] 
 
Introduction to Monte-Carlo methods. [5 lectures] 
 
Case studies like Monte Carlo simulation in polymers. [5 lectures] 
 
Text Book 
Leach, R. (2001) Molecular Modelling: Principles and Applications, Pearson Education. 
 
Online Learning Materials 
Srabani Taraphder, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104/105/104105088/ 

 
  

82 
 



Title Food Engineering Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for  B.Tech   Type PE 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge about different aspects of food engineering. 
2. Train the student in food preservation and food processing.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand different aspects of food engineering and food preservation. 
2. Analyze the food processing aspects.  
 
Contents 
General introduction of food, food engineering and food preservation. [4 lectures] 
Composition of foods, chemistry, properties, and function of carbohydrates, proteins, amino acids, lipids, vitamins. 
[7 lectures] 
General principles underlying spoilage and chemical changes of food caused by microorganisms. [5 lectures] 
Food preservation by application of heat (canning), dehydration, freezing, ionization radiation, chemical 
preservatives, fermentation and the like. [7 lectures]  
Case studies of food processing viz. meat, fish and poultry; vegetables and fruits; bakery and dairy products. [7 
lectures] 
Quality control of food and food products. [3 lectures] 
Food laws, rules and standards, food engineering overview, [3 lectures] 
Production of engineered food products, [3 lectures] 
Case studies in food engineering, Industrial and commercial aspects of food technology. [3 lectures] 
 
Text Books 
1. Murano P. Understanding Food Science and Technology  
2. Friberg, S.  Handbook of Food and Beverage Fermentation Technology (Food Science and Technology)  
 
Reference Books  
1. Reed G, Prescott and Dunn's Industrial Microbiology  
2. Shuler, M.L. and Kargi, F. [2003] Bioprocess Engineering: Basic Concepts, Prentice Hall of India 
Online Course Material  
 https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/107/103107088/ 

 
  

83 
 



Title Modelling of Atoms, Molecules and Surfaces  Number CHL7XX0 
Department Chemical Engineering L-T-P-D [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, M.Tech., M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide background on various forms of Intermolecular and Molecule-Surface interactions. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1.  Gain fundamental understanding on the molecular nature of systems and surfaces. 
2.  Learn about the importance of intermolecular forces in molecular modeling and simulations in chemical and 

allied engineering. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Four Forces of Nature, Early Scientific Period (1 Lecture), First Phenomenological Theories, Modern 
View of origin of Intermolecular Forces (2 Lectures). [3 Lectures] 
Forces Between Atoms and Molecules, Principle and Concepts: Some Thermodynamic Aspects of Intermolecular 
Forces (3 Lectures), Covalent and Coulomb Interactions (3 Lectures), Interactions Involving Polar Molecules, 
Interactions Involving Polarisation of Molecules (5 Lectures), van der Waals Forces (3 Lectures), Repulsive Forces, 
Total Pair Potentials (3 Lectures), Hydrogen Bonding, Hydrophobic and Hydrophilic Interactions (2 Lectures). 
[19 Lectures] 
Forces Between Particles and Surfaces: Concepts of Intermolecular and Interparticle Forces (2 Lectures), Contrast 
Between Intermolecular, Interparticle and Intersurface Forces (3 Lectures), van der Waals Forces Between 
Surfaces (2 Lectures), Electrostatic Forces Between Surfaces in Liquids (5 Lectures), Solvation, Structural and 
Hydration Forces (3 Lectures), Steric and Fluctuation Forces (3 Lectures), Adhesion (2 Lectures). [20 Lectures] 
 
Textbook 
J. N. Israelachvili, 2003, Intermolecular and Surface Forces, 2nd Edition, Academic Press. 

 

84 
 



1. Introduction 

This BTech program combines two broad areas, Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, while building a strong 
foundation in Computer Science. Artificial Intelligence (AI) aims to create machines to act with higher levels of 
intelligence and emulate the human capabilities of sense, comprehend and act. On the other hand, Data Science 
(DS) is the art of generating insight, knowledge and predictions by processing data pertaining to a system or a 
process. AI and Data Science can feed into each other as evolutionary systems that can continuously learn from 
data and thereby emulate humans better. As the demand for these areas increases, there is also an increasing 
need for building the future workforce for Artificial Intelligence and Data Science. IIT Jodhpur will offer this 
unique program to develop the Artificial Intelligence and Data Science ecosystem in the country. The curriculum 
includes courses in computer science, mathematics, artificial intelligence, machine learning, and their 
applications in various domains. The curriculum also provides opportunities to the students to explore 
specialization areas including visual computing, socio-digital realities, robotics, and AIOT. The program also 
allows the students to venture into Management specialization with AI and Technology focus, leading to MBA 
(BTech + MBA dual degree program), as well as entrepreneurial activities. The program also enables the students 
to build strong industry linkages in terms of practical training program, summer internships, and co-supervision 
on projects.  
 
2. Objectives of the program 

1. BTech in AIDE will offer students with in-depth knowledge of fundamental concepts, as well as application-
oriented technologies in the broad areas of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science.  

2. A student completing this program will be capable of undertaking careers in industry as well as academia. 
Interested students may also follow entrepreneurial endeavors in AIDE areas.   

3. He/She will have the option to explore a variety of domains including governance, finance, security, 
transportation, healthcare, energy management, agriculture/food processing, population studies, legal 
systems, content creation and management systems, weather prediction, economics, predictive maintenance, 
smart manufacturing, education, human and robot interaction/intelligent automation, smart city, drug 
discovery, and aid for differently abled/accessibility technology. 

 
3. Expected Graduate Attributes 

After completing this program, a student will develop an ability to: 
1. Comprehend fundamental concepts and hands-on knowledge of the state-of-the-art AIDE methodologies. 
2. Skill set to clean, process, analyze, manage and handle security and privacy aspects of structured and 

unstructured data. 
3. Ability to identify, design and apply appropriate pattern recognition and data mining methods for generating 

relevant insight from data. 
4. Design and build real-world AIDE systems, solving application-specific problems, and to reason about them. 
5. Conceive, design and develop Intelligent multi-modal multi-sensory Man-Machine interfaces. 
6. Design, develop, and deploy machine learning based applications using structured and unstructured data 

(e.g., speech, text, images/videos). 
7. Capability to follow a unique interdisciplinary approach for solving problems, using knowledge of 

mathematics, statistics, computing and one or more selected domains among physics, chemistry, biology, 
engineering sciences, and management. 

8. Understand and assess reliability, dependability and trust-worthiness of AIDE based systems and their 
impact on societal and environmental context.  

9. Design and develop AI applications for resource constrained environments. 
10. Adhere to evolving ethics and privacy laws across various domains and territories. 
11. Plan and manage technical projects. 
 
4. Learning Outcomes 

The student will have an ability to 
1. Apply the knowledge of mathematics, science, engineering fundamentals along with artificial intelligence 

and machine learning knowledge, and an engineering specialization to develop solutions to real-world 
problems. 

2. Apply appropriate theories, design principles, frameworks, and protocols to develop AI & DS based system 
prototypes. 

1 
 



3. Demonstrate hands-on knowledge of modern simulation, and AI & DS programming tools with an 
understanding of the limitations. 

4. Apply to reason informed by the contextual knowledge to assess societal, health, safety, legal and cultural 
issues and the consequent responsibilities relevant to the professional engineering practice.       

5. Function effectively as an individual, and as a member or leader in diverse teams, and in multidisciplinary 
settings.    

6. Communicate effectively on complex engineering activities by comprehending and writing effective reports 
and design documentation, making effective presentations and exchanging clear instructions. 

7. Apply appropriate project and business management principles and tools for real-world problems.     
8. Recognize the need for, and have the preparation and ability to engage in independent and life-long 

learning in the broadest context of technological change. 
 
5. New skill sets targeted 

1. AIDE algorithms for transforming large data into actionable decision  
2. Building end to end systems for enhancing human capabilities using vision, language, and text processing  
3. Foundations in ML Optimization  
4. Ethical, Safe, and Dependable AI/ML Systems  
5. Familiarity with emerging and futuristic AIDE techniques 
6. Entrepreneurial capability 
7. Written and oral communication 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 



6. Topic clouds and Mapping of Topic clouds with proposed courses 
Map topics with courses in the table given below: 
 
Table 1. Topics and Mapping of Topic with Courses 
Area Topics Category Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 

(Core/ 
Techniques 
Technology/
Systems) 

 Abstract Data Types, Linear Data Structures, Non Core Data Structures and 
AI and ML Linear Data Structures, Stack, Queue, Link List, Heap, Algorithms (PC) 

Sorting, Hashing, Algorithm Analysis, Graph, Tree 

Discrete Structures, Logics, Set, Graph and Trees, Core Maths for Computing (PC) 
Deterministic Finite Automata, Non-deterministic 
Finite Automata, PushDown Automata, Context Free 
Grammar, Turing Machine, Lexical and Syntax 
Analysis, Parsing 

Hardware-Software interaction, Digital circuit design Core Principles of Computer 
and analysis, Computer system design, Instruction set Systems - 1 (PC)  
architecture, Language translation, Semantic analysis  

Network-OS interaction, Process management, Core Principles of Computer 
Storage management,  Systems - 2 (PC)  

Complexity Analysis, Divide-and-conquer, Greedy Core Design and Analysis of 
Algorithms, Dynamic Programming, Linear Algorithms (PC) 
Programming, Universal Hashing, Max-flow Min-cut, 
Amortized Analysis, Traveling Salesman Problem, 
Approximation Algorithms 

Bayes Decision Theory, Regression, Bias variance, Core and Pattern Recognition and 
Maximum Likelihood Estimation, Bayesian Parameter Technique Machine Learning (IE) 
Estimation, Decision Tree, Random Forest, Artificial 
Neural Network, Clustering, k-means, SVM, Feature 
Selection, Dimensionality Reduction 
Uninformed Search Strategies, Informed Search Technique Artificial Intelligence (PC)  
Strategies, Local Search Algorithms, Hill Climbing, 
Constraint Satisfaction Problems, Backtracking, 
Adversarial Search, Min-Max algorithms, Propositional 
Logic, Reasoning Patterns, First-order logic, Syntax, 
Semantics, Q-value, Policy,  
Neural Networks, Gradient Descent, Optimization, Technique Deep Learning (PC) 
Regularization, Autoencoder, Convolutional Neural 
Network, Recurrent Neural Network, LSTM, Deep 
Generative Models, Generative Adversarial Network 
(GAN), Deep Belief Network, Deep Convolutional 
GAN, Variational Autoencoder, Representation 
Learning, Unsupervised Pre-training, Transfer 
Learning, Distributed Representation, Domain 
Adaptation, Neural Language Model, Adversarial 
Learning 
Accuracy-explainabilitytradeoff, Interpretability Technique Dependable AI (PC) 
problem, Predictability, Transparency, Traceability, 
Causality, Reasoning, Attention and Saliency, 
Interpretable AI, Prediction Consistency, Adversarial 
Robustness, Trustworthy AI, Integrity, Reproducibility, 
Accountability, Bias-free AI, Verified AI, Federated 
Learning, Differential Privacy,  

3 
 



Convexity, Linear programming, Duality, Integer Core and Optimization for Machine 
programming, Nonlinear programming, Lagrange Technique Learning (PC) 
multipliers, First and second order conditions, Local 
and global convergence, Gradient descent methods 

Decision-making, Utility Theory, Utility Functions, Core Advanced AI (PE) 
Decision Networks, Sequential Decision Problems, 
Partially Observable MDP, Game Theory, 
Reinforcement Learning, Generalization, Policy Search, 
Hidden Markov Model, Kalman Filter, Knowledge 
Representation,  Ontological Engineering, Situation 
Calculus, Semantic Networks, Description Logic, 
Planning graphs, Partial-order Planning, Conditional 
Planning, Continuous Planning, Multi-agent Planning, 
Hierarchical Task Network Planning, Non-deterministic 
Domains 
Kernel Machines, Variants of Support Vector Machines, Core and Advanced Machine 
PAC Theory, Boosting, Graphical Models, Structural Techniques Learning (PE) 
Predictions, Deep Reinforcement Learning, Sparse 
Coding 
Computational complexity of AI models, Prediction Systems and Resource-constrained 
accuracy, Numeric accuracy, Precision, Memory Technique Artificial Intelligence (PE) 
footprints, Edge AI, Memory Optimization of Models, 
Hardware accelerators for Edge AI, Vision Processing 
Unit, Streaming Hybrid Architecture Vector Engine, 
Open Neural Network Exchange 
Search Engine Architecture, Retrieval Models, Technique Information Retrieval (PE) 
Performance Evaluation, Text Categorization, Text 
Clustering, Web Information Retrieval, Structured 
Document Retrieval 
Graph algorithms, Directed and Undirected graph, Core Graph Theoretic 
Planner graph, Graph coloring, Hamiltonion and Algorithms (PE) 
Eulorian graph, Bipartite graphs, Trees. 
Streaming Algorithms, Stream mining using Clustering, Core and Stream Analytics (PE) 
Massive Data Clustering, Data Stream Classification, Technique 
Distributed Mining of Streaming Data, Change 
Diagnosis, Forecasting on Stream, Dimensionality 
Reduction for Streaming data. 

HCI and User experience, Prototyping techniques and Technique Human-Machine 
Social evaluation, Interface design and interaction, Speculative and Systems Interaction (PC)  
Sensing design, Value sensitive design 

Visual World, Geometry, Lights and Optics, Tracking, Technique Introduction to AR and 
Motion, Depth, devices and tools VR (PE)  

Graphs, Network Models, Network Data Generation, Technique Social Networks (PE)  
Structural Properties, Link Prediction, Community 
Detection, Information Cascade, Small World 
Phenomenon, Homophily, Structural Balance, 
Components, NetworkX, Gephi, Network Evolution, 
Multi-layer network 

Data and Representing data, Data science ecosystem, data Techniques Data Engineering (PC) 
Distributed sources, data storage, data model, Structured data, and Systems 
Sciences unstructured data, semi-structured data, Accessing 

data, SQL, NoSQL databases, parallel data reads/writes 
for high throughput, distributed database, Analysing 
data, distributed data processing 
Data Visualization, Data representation, feature Techniques Data Visualization (PC) 
representations, encoded representations, Spatial data and Systems 
representation, Time-series data representations, 

4 
 



visualization of multivariate data, geometry, 
Information illustration, Maps and Graphics, Advanced 
Visualization, Interactive graphics, infographics, 
visualization of high dimensional data 
Multivariate analysis, Sampling theory, Matrix Techniques Maths for Big Data (PC) 
decomposition, Algorithms for big matrices, Data and Systems 
intensive processing 

Decision Computational Neuroscience Models: Descriptive,  Computational 
Sciences Mechanistic and Interpretive models, Synapse, Neural Neuroscience (PE) 
and encoding, Neural decoding, Neuron models, Spikes, 
Cognition Modeling connections between neurons, Synaptic 

plasticity and learning, Unsupervised and supervised 
learning from the perspective of neurons 
Biological signals, Biomedical imaging modalities,  Bio-imaging (PE)  
Sectioning, Multimodal images, Reconstruction, Image 
segmentation, Object delineation, Classification, Image 
registration, Deep Learning for Bio-imaging, Tracking, 
Interactive image analysis 

Application Image digitization, Pixel relationships and distances, Technique Digital Image Processing 
s  Camera model and stereo imaging, Image transforms, (PE)  

Image Enhancement: Spatial and Frequency domain, 
Image Restoration, Image segmentation, Color image 
processing, image morphology, Image compression and 
coding, Image features 
Spoken language technology, dialog and conversational Techniques Speech Understanding 
systems, automatic speech recognition, speech (PE)  
synthesis, affect detection, dialogue management. 
Image formation and transformations, Camera Techniques Computer Vision (PE)  
calibration, Image restoration, Spatial and Wavelet-
based processing, Epipolar Geometry, SfM, Optical 
flow, Key-point detection, Feature description and 
matching, Deep learning for vision, Applications 

Geometric primitives, clipping, viewing, rendering, Technique Computer Graphics (PE)  
animation, Shading, Coloring, OpenGL 

Word representation, NLP tasks, Seq2Seq model, Applications Natural Language 
Question Answering, Sentiment Analysis, Dialogue Understanding (PE)  
system, Machine Translation, natural language 
generation, Interpretability, Knowledge Graphs 
Biometric system design, Genesis of biometrics, System Applications Advanced Biometrics (PE)  
architecture, Performance evaluation, Biometric 
modalities, Biometric security, Biometric devices, 
Biomedical applications 
Multi-dimensional signals, systems, transforms and Applications Video Processing (PE) 
sampling; Camera models; Motion and shape 
estimation; Video segmentation and tracking; Video 
filtering, compression and restoring; Ego-centric, 360-
degree and Streaming video 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 



7. Course Categories, credit distribution and Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 
 
Table 2. ProposedCourse Categories and credit distribution in the proposed B.Tech. Programmes   

S.N.  Course Type Course Category  Regular B.Tech. Double B.Tech.  
Credit  Total Credit  Total 

1 Institute Core (I) Engineering (IE) 34 69 34 59 
 Science (IS) 16 16 

Humanities (IH) 12 9 
2 Programme Linked (L) Science (LS) 7 0 
3 Programme Core (P) Programme Compulsory (PC) 51 71 47+3 71 

Programme Electives (PE) 17 21-3 
B.Tech. Project (PP) 3 3 

4 Open (O) Open Electives (OE) 10 10 0 0 
5 Engineering Science (E) Engineering Science Core (EC) 0 0 22 22 

Engineering Science Elective (EE) 0 0 8,11 8 
Total Graded 150  160 

6 Non-Graded (N) Humanities (NH) 6 15 6 15 
Engineering (NE) 3 3 

Design/Practical Experience (ND)  6 6 
Total Graded + Non-Graded   165  175 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 



8. Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 
 
Table 4. Credit Structure for B.Tech. Programmes (Up 6000 Level) 

Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact hours Total Credits  
Contact Hours Beyond Contact Total Hours (TC=TH/3) 

(CH) Hours (BCH) (TH) 
1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1 
1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 hr 2 hr 3hr 1  
1 hour of Lab/Project 0-0-1 1 hr 0.5 hr 1.5 hr 0.5 

#Contact hour for projects refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 



9. List of Programme Compulsory Courses 
 
Table 5. Programme Compulsory Courses  

Sr. No Course Name LTP Contact Hours Credit 
1 Data Structure and Algorithms 3-0-2 5 4 
2 Maths for Computing 3-1-0 4 4 
3 Principles of Computer Systems - 1 (Compilers and 2-0-2 4 3 

CA) 
4 Data Engineering 3-0-3 6 4.5 
5 Human-Machine Interaction 0-0-4 4 2 
6 Design and Analysis of Algorithms 3-1-0 4 4 
7 Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0 3 3 
8 Optimization for ML 3-0-3 6 4.5 
9 Principles of Computer Systems - 2  3-0-2 4 4 

10 Data Visualization 3-0-3              6 4.5 
11 Deep Learning 3-0-3 6 4.5 
12 Dependable AI 3-0-0 3 3 
13 DSAI Core Elective 1 (DS + X) 3-0-0 3 3 
14 DSAI Core Elective 2 (AI + X) 3-0-0 3 3 
15 Maths for Big Data* 2-1-0 3 3 

Total 51 
*For Core ES + AIDE program, under DS+X for regular program, Ethics, Policy, Law and Regulations in AI (0-0-
2) is a core course under Professional Ethics - II (Sem VI).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 



10. Area-wise Programme Elective Courses 
 
Table 6. Stream-wise Programme Electives Courses  
S. No. Stream Courses L-T-P Credit 

1 Advanced Artificial Intelligence  3-0-0 3 
2 Advanced Machine Learning 3-0-0 3 
3 Resource Constrained Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0 3 
4 Scalable Machine Learning  3-0-0 3 

AI and ML 
5 Computational Learning Theory  3-0-0 3 
6 Information Retrieval 3-0-0 3 
7 Graph Theoretic Algorithms 3-0-0 3 
8 Stream Analytics 3-0-0 3 
9 Introduction to Robotics 3-0-0 3 

10 Robotics and Planning and Decision Making of Robots 3-0-0 3 
11 Automation Multi-Agent Systems  3-0-0 3 
12 Autonomous Systems 3-0-0 3 
13 Multimodal  Interfaces    0-0-2 2 
14 Introduction to Haptics    3-0-0 3 
15 Socio-Digital Reality Introduction to AR and VR 3-0-0 3 
16 Advanced Human-Machine Interaction 3-0-0 3 
17 Social Networks 3-0-0 3 
18 Computational Neuroscience 3-0-0 3 
19 Science of Intelligence  Connectomics 3-0-0 3 
20 Bioimaging 3-0-0 3 
21 Digital Image Processing 3-0-0 3 
22 Computer Vision 3-0-0 3 
23 Natural Language Understanding 3-0-0 3 
24 Speech Understanding 3-0-0 3 
25 Computational Linguistics 3-0-0 3 

Applications 
26 Advanced Biometrics 3-0-0 3 
27 Computer Graphics 3-0-0 3 
28 Video Processing 3-0-0 3 
29 Animation 3-0-0 3 
30 GPU Programming 3-0-0 3 
31 Introduction to Cyber Physical Systems 3-0-0 3 
32 Cyber Physical Systems, Embedded Systems Design 3-0-0 3 
33 Sensors and Internet of Security in CPS 3-0-0 3 
34 Things Edge and Fog Computing  3-0-0 3 
35 Real Time Systems 3-0-0 3 

36 Introduction to Space Science 3-0-0 3 

37 Reliability Engineering and Life Testing 3-0-0 3 
38 Introduction to Game Theory 3-0-0 3 

Data and Discovery 
39 Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos 3-0-0 3 

Science 
40 Differential Geometry 3-0-0 3 
41 Introduction to Financial Engineering 3-0-0 3 
42 Computational Chemistry 3-0-0 3 
43 Special Topics in ML 3-0-0 3 
44 Special Topics  Special Topics: Advancements in Computer Vision  3-0-0 3 
45 Special Topics in Data Science 3-0-0 3 

 
 
 

9 
 



11. Specialization to be offered by the department 
 

Table 7a. Specialization and courses 
S. Name of Specialization Core (8 Specialization Elective (12 Credits) 

No. Specialization credits) 
Digital Image Processing, Video Processing and 
Analysis, Advanced Machine Learning, 
Introduction to  AR and VR, Scalable Machine 
Learning, Computational Photography, 

Computer Graphics (3-0-0), 
Visual Computing  Computational Imaging,Principles of Biological 

Computer Vision (3-0-0), 
1. (CS, AIDE, EE) Vision, Bioimaging, Medical Image Analysis, 

Visual Computing Lab (0-0-
 Visual Perception, Advancements in Computer 

4)  
Vision, Animation, Real-time Vision 
Architecture, Image Synthesis, 3D Shape 
Analysis, Image and Video Forensics, Selected 
Topics in Computer Vision, Project (0-0-12) 

Social Network (3-0-0), Introduction to Haptics, Design Process, Speech 
Socio-Digital Reality Introduction to AR and VR Understanding, Computer Graphics, HCI, NLU, 

2. 
(CS, AIDE, EE) (3-0-0), Multimodal Computer Vision, Visual Perception, Image and 

interface Lab (0-0-4) Video Forensics, Project (0-0-12)   

Intelligent 
3.  Communications and Jointly with EE Jointly with EE 

Networking 

4.  Robotics Jointly with RM-IDRP Jointly with RM-IDRP 

5.  AIOT Jointly with EE Jointly with EE 

Algorithm for big data, computer vision, 
machine learning with big data, edge and fog 
computing, NLP, GPU Programming, Data 

AI  
AI (3-0-0), Deep Learning Visualization, Introduction to AR and VR, 

6.  (for non-AI, non-CS 
(3-0-0), AI Lab (0-0-4)  Dependable AI, Resource constrained AI, 

Students) 
Social Network Analysis, Optimization, 
Computer Graphics, Advanced AI, Advanced 
ML, Project (0-0-12) 

*Science of Intelligence, Smart Healthcare, and Language Technologies Specializations will be added in the 
future   
 
Table 7b. AI+X courses. 

S. No. Course Status 
1. AI + Industry 4.0  Jointly with ME 
2 Autonomous Systems  IDRP 
3. AI + Transportation CSE 

 
Table 7c. DS+X (Applied Statistics) courses. 

S. No. Course Status 
1. Maths for Big Data CS+Math course  
2. Statistical Inference and Simulation Techniques  Maths course 
3. Introduction to Financial Engineering Maths course 
4. Time Series Analysis Math course 

 
 
  

10 
 



12. Curriculum of B.Tech. AIDE  (Regular) 
 
Table 8b. Curriculum of B.Tech. in AIDE 

Cat Course LTP CH NC GC Cat Course LTP CH NC GC 
 I Semester   II Semester 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IE Engineering 2-1-0 3 - 3 
Electrical Mechanics 
Engineering 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Chemistry  3-0-0 3 - 3 
Computer 
Science 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Physics  3-0-0 3 - 3 
Bioengineering 

      IS Chemistry Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1 
      IS Physics Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1 

IS Mathematics I  3-1-0 4 - 4 IS Mathematics II 3-1-0 4 - 4 
IE Engineering 0-0-2 2 - 1 IE Engineering 0-0-2 1 - 1 

Visualization Realization 
NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - 

Design I  Design II  
NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - 

Skill I  Skill II  
NH Social Connect 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Social Connect 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 

and and 
responsibilities I responsibilities II 

NH Performing Arts 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Performing Arts 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 
I/ Sports I  II/ Sports II 

Total 12-1-14 27 3 17 Total 11-2-12 25 3 16 
 III Semester  IV Semester 

LS PSSP 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Materials Science 1 ×  1 - 1 

IE i-Energy 2X 1-0-0 2 - 2 & Engineering 1-0-0   

materials  (Electronic 

ii- Computational  materials) 

Materials Design 
PC Data Structures 3-0-2 5 - 4 IE Pattern 3-0-2 5 - 4 

and Algorithms Recognition and 
Machine Learning 

PC Maths for 3-1-0 4 0 4 IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4 
Computing 

IE Signals and 3-1-0 4 - 4 PC HMI     0-0-4    4   - 2 
Systems PCS-1 2-0-2 2 - 3 

LS Quantum Info 3-0-0 3 - 3 PCS-2 3-0-2 4 - 4 
Processing 

NE Intro. To 0-0-2 2 1  IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Profession  

Total 17-3-4 24 1 21 Total 15-1-10 24 - 21 
 V Semester  VI Semester 

PC DA of     3-1-0    4     4 PC Data     3-0-3    6  4.5 
 Algorithms   -   Visualization   -  
 Artificial 3-0-0 3 - 3 Deep Learning 3-0-3 6 - 4.5 

 Intelligence 3-0-3 6 -   4.5 AI+X / DS+ X 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Optimization in    Dependable AI   3-0-0 3 3 
ML    
Data Engineering    

3-0-3 6 4.5 

11 
 



IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3 PE Programme/ 6-0-0 6  6 
Open Elective 

NH Professional 0-1-0  1 - NH Ethics, Policy, 0-0-2  1 - 
Ethics I Law and 

Regulations in AI 
Total 15-2-6 22 1 19 Total   18-0-4 24 1 21 

 VII Semester  VIII Semester 
PP B. Tech. Project  0-0-6 6 - 3 IH Humanities IV 3-0-0 3 - 3 

PCPE AI+X / DS+ X 3-0-0 3 - 3 PE/ Programme/ 15-0-0 15 - 15 
/ Programme/ 6-0-0 6 6 OE Open Electives 

OE Open Electives 
IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3       
IS Environmental 2-0-0 2 - 2       

Sci 
Total 14-0-6 21 - 17 Total 18-0-0 18 - 18 

Total of graded and Non-Graded Credit  9 150 
Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 

Grand Total  165 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 



13. Curriculum of Double B.Tech. : B.Tech. AIDE Engineering  and Engineering Science 
 

Table 9. Programme structure of Double B.Tech. 

Cat Course LTP CH N GC Cat Course LTP CH NC GC 
C 

 I Semester   II Semester 

First two semesters same as Table 8a or 8 b 
33 Graded and 6 non graded credits 

 III Semester  IV Semester 

ES Probability, Statistics, 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Materials 3 ×  3 - 3 
Stochastic Processes Science & 1-0-0    

Engineering  

ES Modern Physics 3-0-0 3 - 3 ES Embedded 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Systems and 
IoT 

IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Pattern 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Recognition 
and Machine 
Learning 

ES Data Structures and 3-0-2 5 - 4 ES Design of 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Algorithms Experiments 

IE Signals and Systems 3-1-0 4 - 4 ES Modelling and 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Simulation 

NE Intro. To Profession  0-0-2 2 1  IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3 - 3 

Total 15-3-4 22 1 19 Total 18-0-6 24 - 21 

 V Semester  VI Semester 

PC Maths for Comp. 3-1-0 4  - 4 PC PCS-1    2-0-2 2  3 
 DA of Algorithm 3-1-0 4 - 4    PCS-2    3-0-2 4   6 - 4 
 Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0 3 - 3 Data Engg 3-0-3 6 - 4.5 
 Optimization in ML   -  Data 3-0-3  - 4.5 
 HMI 3-0-3 6 4.5 Visualization  6  

   Deep Learning 3-0-3  4.5 
0-0-4 4 2 AI+X / DS+ X  3  

  Dependable AI   3-0-0 3 3 
3-0-0 3 

PE Programme/ 3-0-0 3  3       
Engineering Science 
Elective/ Multimodal 
Bouquet (3) 

IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3       

NH Professional Ethics I 0-1-0  1 - NH Ethics, Policy, 0-0-2  1 - 
Law and 
Regulations in 
AI 

Total 18-3-7 27 1 23.5 Total 20-0-15 30 1 26.5 

 VII Semester  VIII Semester 

PP B. Tech. Project  0-0-6 6 - 3 PE/ Programme/ 14-0-0 14 - 14 
ES Engineering 

13 
 



Science 
Electives 

PC AI+X / DS+ X 3-0-0 3    3  IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3 
 Maths for Big Data 2-1-0 3 -  3 

- 

PE/ Programme/ 9-0-0 9 - 9       
OE Engineering Science 

Electives/ 
Multimodal Bouquet 
(3) 

IS Environmental 2-0-0 2 - 2       
Science 

Total 16-1-6 25 - 20 Total 17-0-0 17 - 17 

Total of graded and Non-Graded Credit  9 160 

Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 

Grand Total  175 

 Note: ES are proposed Engineering Science compulsory courses   
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

14 
 



14. Detailed Course Content of Programme Compulsory Courses 
 
Course Title Data Structures and Algorithms Course No. CSxxx 

Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-2 [4] 

Offered for B.Tech of all branches Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Introduction to Computer Programming   

Objectives 
1. To introduce and practice the implementation of various data structures used for indexing, searching, 

and sorting operations.  
2. To introduce basic mathematical techniques for algorithm analysis and design.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to design and implement appropriate data structures for indexing, searching, and sorting 

operations for real-world problems. 
2. Designing of new algorithms using standard data structures. 
3. Analyzing the time and space complexities of standard data structures and basic algorithms.  

 
  Contents  
Algorithm analysis and complexity: Big/little -Oh, Omega, Theta notation, Recurrence equations. (2 
Lectures)  
Abstract data types: Linear data structures, Tree, Binary trees, Tree traversal, Applications. (7 Lectures)  
Search trees: Binary search trees, Balanced search trees, AVL trees, B-Trees. (5 Lectures)  
Heaps: Binary Heap, Heap order property and min/max heaps. (3 Lectures)  
Sets: Disjoint set ADT, Basic operations on Sets, Union/Find algorithm. (2 Lectures)  
Sorting algorithms: Bubble sort, Selection sort, Bucket sort, Insertion sort, Overview of Divide-and-
conquer, Quick sort, Merge sort. (6 Lectures)  
Hashing: Hash tables and operations, Hash function, Open and closed hashing, External and internal 
hashing, Collision resolving methods, Rehashing. (5 Lectures)  
Graph algorithms: Definitions, Branch and bound, Backtracking, Representation, Traversal, Shortest-path 
algorithms, Minimum Spanning Tree algorithm, Topological sorting. (8 Lectures)  
Greedy techniques and Dynamic programming (4 Lectures)  

 
 Laboratory 
1. Implementation of data structures using C programming language.  
2. Practically verifying and comparing run-time performance and asymptotic behavior of various data 

structures and related algorithms.  
3. Applications of data structures from real-life scenarios.  
 
Text Book 
M. A. WEISS (2002), Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C, Addison-Wesley, 2nd Edition. 
 
Reference Book 

  T. H. CORMEN, C. E. LEISERSON, R.L. RIVEST, C. STEIN (2009),Introduction to Algorithms, MIT Press,   
3rd Edition. 

 
  

15 
 



Title Principles of Computer Systems - I  Course No. AIDSLXXX 
Department CSE, AI & DS  Structure (L-T-P [C]) 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech (AI) Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Maths for Computing Antirequisite Computer Architecture 
  Objectives 

The Instructor will: 
1. Explain necessary layered abstraction of a system 
2. Provide an understanding of basic concepts of several hardware components and design of computing 

components 
3. Introduce language translation schemes 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Design combinational and sequential circuits for a set of problems 
2. Explain the working principles of several components of a computer 
3. Design algorithms for language translations. 

 
Contents 
Introduction: Layered architecture of a system, Hardware, Software, Hardware-software Interaction (2 
Lectures) 
Digital Circuit Design: Combinational Circuits, Combinational Analysis and Design, Sequential Circuits,  
Sequential Analysis and Design (10 Lectures) 
Computer System Design: Instruction set Architecture, CPU, Performance analysis, Pipelining, Memory 
Hierarchy, I/O, ILP (10 Lectures) 
Language Translation: Levels of language translation, Compiler, Semantic Analysis, Code generation (6 
Lectures) 
 
Laboratory 
Digital Logic Circuits, Digital Hardware, VHDL state machines, Machine Language Design, Memory, CPU, 
Assembler, Parallel Programming. 
 
Text Books 
1. S. WARFORD (2017), Computer Systems, Jones and Bartlett Learning, 5th Edition. 
2. R. BRYANT, D. O’HALLARON (2016), Computer Systems A Programmer’s Perspective, Pearson, 3rd 

Edition. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Saltzer, J. and Kaashoek, F. (2009), Control Systems - Principles & Design, 3rd Edition, Morgan Kaufmann 
2. John L. Hennesy, David A. Patterson (2017), Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach, 6th 

Edition, Morgan Kaufmann. 
 
Online Material 

   NPTEL Course, Foundations of Computer Systems Design, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106197/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

16 
 



Title Principles of Computer Systems - II Course No.  AIDSLXXX 

Department CSE, AI & DS Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech (AI & DS) Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Principles of Computer Systems - I Antirequisite OS, CN 

(Same Semester) 
   Objectives 

The Instructor will: 
1. Explain necessary layered abstraction of a system 
2. Provide an understanding of the fundamentals of operating systems and networking 
3. Introduce the concepts of Virtualization 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Explain the working principles of operating systems 
2. Design interconnected environments using basic networking protocols. 
3. Apply concepts of Virtualization in a practical environment 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Layered architecture of a system, Kernel, Network-Operating System Interaction (4 Lectures) 
Process Management:Process, process states, concurrent processes, inter-process communication, 
Synchronization, Deadlock (12 Lectures) 
Storage management: Memory Allocation, Virtual Memory, File Management (9 Lectures) 
Network Design:Working principles, Layered Architecture, IP Addressing, Protocols for Transport, and 
Application Layers. (12 Lectures) 
Virtualization: Basics of Virtual Machines, Containers, Virtualization techniques, Cloud and Data Centers 
(5 Lectures) 
 
Laboratory 
Introduction to the Linux environment, Process Management, and Synchronization, Scheduling, Memory 
Management, Client-Server message passing, Internet protocols, IP addressing, peer to peer protocol, 
virtualization. 
 
Text Books 
1. S. WARFORD (2017), Computer Systems, Jones and Bartlett Learning, 5th Edition.  
2. N.F. SCHNEIDEWIND, (2012), Computer, Network, Software, and Hardware Engineering with 

Applications, Wiley-IEEE Press. 
 
Reference Books 
1. A. SILBERSCHATZ, P.B. GALVIN, G. GAGNE (2013), Operating System Concepts, Wiley 8th Edition. 
2. S. DAS (2017), UNIX Concepts and Applications, Tata McGraw-Hill. 
3. J. KUROSE, K.ROSS (2016), Computer Networking: A Top-Down Approach, Pearson, 7th Edition. 
 
Online Material 
1. NPTEL Course: Operating System Fundamentals, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106/105/106105214/ 
2. NPTEL Course: Computer Network and Internet Protocol, 

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106/106/106106091/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 



Course Title Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning Course No. CSL2xx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering, AIDE Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-2 
Offered for B.Tech (CSE, AIDE, EE)  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Introduction to Computer Sc., Probability, Antirequisite Introduction to 

Statistics and Stochastic Processes Machine Learning 
Objectives 
1. To understand various key paradigms for pattern classification and machine learning approaches  
2. To familiarize with the mathematical and statistical techniques used in pattern recognition and machine 

learning.  
3. To understand and differentiate among various pattern recognition and machine learning techniques.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. To formulate a machine learning problem  
2. Select an appropriate pattern analysis tool for analyzing data in a given feature space.  
3. Apply pattern recognition and machine learning techniques such as classification and feature selection 

to practical applications and detect patterns in the data. 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Definitions, Datasets for Pattern Recognition, Different Paradigms of Pattern Recognition and 
Machine Learning, Data Normalization, Hypothesis Evaluation, VC-Dimensions and Distribution, Bias-
Variance Tradeoff, Regression (Linear) (8 Lectures) 
Discriminative Methods: Distance-based methods, Linear Discriminant Functions, Decision Tree, Random 
Decision Forest and Boosting (5 Lectures) 
Bayes Decision Theory: Bayes decision rule, Minimum error rate classification, Normal density and 
discriminant functions, Bayesian networks (7 Lectures) 
Parameter Estimation: Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian Parameter Estimation (3 Lectures) 
Feature Selection and Dimensionality Reduction:PCA, LDA, ICA, SFFS, SBFS  (4 Lectures) 
Artificial Neural Networks: MLP, Backprop, and RBF-Net (4 Lectures)  
Kernel Machines: Kernel Tricks, Support Vector Machines (primal and dual forms), K-SVR, K-PCA (6 
Lectures) 
Clustering: k-means clustering, Gaussian Mixture Modeling, EM-algorithm (5 Lectures) 
 
Laboratory  
Programming labs on Normalization, Visualization, Evaluation, Regressions, Decision Tree, Bayes, 
Parameter Estimation, PCA, LDA, ANN, SVM, K-means, GMM, Feature Selection 
 
Text Book 
1. R. O. DUDA, P. E. HART, D. G. STORK (2000), Pattern Classification, Wiley-Blackwell, 2nd Edition. 
 
Reference Books 
1. C. M. BISHOP (2006), Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer-Verlag New York, 1st 

Edition.  
2. T. M. MITCHELL (2017), Machine Learning, McGraw Hill Education, 1st Edition. 
 
Self-learning Material 
1. Introduction to Machine Learning, NPTEL Course Material, Department Computer Science and 

Engineering, IIT Madras: http//nptel.ac.in/courses/106106139/ 
2. Machine Learning, Stanford University: https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS229 

 
  

18 
 



Course Title Maths for Computing Course No. CSLXXX 

Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-1-0 [4] 

Offered for B.Tech CSE, AIDE Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None   

Objectives 
1. To learn about languages, grammars, and computation models 
2. To learn about computability 
3. To learn basics of parsing techniques  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Model computer science problems using discrete mathematical structures 
2. Distinguish between computable and uncomputable problems 
3. Develop understanding of properties of languages and design parsers 
 
Contents  
Discrete Structures:Can computers solve every problem? The Limits of Computing, Set Theory, Proof 
Techniques, Relations and Functions, Propositional Logic, First-Order Logic, Counting techniques. (14 
Lectures) 
Graph Theory: Properties of graphs,  Graph matching and coloring. (7 Lectures) 
Automata Theory:DFAs, NFAs, Equivalence of DFAs and NFAs, Closure Properties of Regular 
Languages, Regular Expressions, Equivalence of Regular Expressions and NFAs, Nonregular Languages, 
Context-Free Grammars, Context-Free Languages. (10 Lectures) 
Turing Machine:Introduction, Designing Turing Machines, The Universal Turing Machine. (7 Lectures) 
Parsing Techniques: LR, LALR, Shift-Reduce Parsers. (4 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. M. SIPSER (2014), Introduction to the Theory of Computation, Cengage Learning, 3rd Edition. 
2. K.H. ROSEN (2018), Discrete Mathematics and its Applications, McGraw-Hill, 2018, 8th Edition.  
 
References 
1. J.E. HOPCROFT, R. MOTWANI, J.D. ULLMAN (2008), Pearson, Introduction to Automata Theory, 

Languages, and Computation, 3rd Edition. 
2. R. JOHNSONBAUGH (2017), Discrete Mathematics, Prentice Hall, 8th Edition. 
 
Self-learning material 
Stanford CS103:http://web.stanford.edu/class/cs103/ 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

19 
 



Course Title Design and Analysis of Algorithms Course No. CSLXxx 

Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-1-0 [4]  

Offered for B.Tech CSE, AIDE Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Data Structures and Algorithms   

Objectives 
1. To introduce and implement various techniques for designing algorithms and advanced data structures.  
2. To learn space and time complexity analysis of algorithms.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to choose and implement appropriate algorithm design techniques for solving problems.  
2. Understand how the choice of data structures and algorithm design methods impact the performance of 

programs.  
3. Ability to analyze the worst-case and average-case behaviour of algorithms in terms of time and memory 

requirements. 
 
Contents  
Reasoning About Algorithms: P, NP, NP-completeness, Reductions, Complexity analysis. (5 lectures)   
Graph Algorithms: Strongly-connected components, Kosaraju’s Algorithm 1 and 2, Applications. (4 
lectures)  
Greedy Techniques: Local versus Global optimality, Interval Scheduling, Exchange arguments. (5 lectures)   
Divide-and-Conquer: Optimality, Recursive algorithms, Divide-and-Conquer Recurrences, The Master 
Theorem and applications, Non-uniform Recurrences. (6 lectures)  
Dynamic Programming: Reusing sub-computations (Sequence alignment, Bellman-Ford algorithm), 
Precomputing (Floyd-Warshall algorithm, Johnson’s algorithm), Combinatorial problems. (Knapsack) (6 
lectures)  
Linear Programming: Canonical and standard forms, Feasibility and optimization, Simplex Algorithm. (5 
lectures)  
Approximation Algorithms: Relative Approximations, PAS and FPAS Scheduling. (4 lectures)  
Randomized Algorithms: Random guess (Quick select), Random guess with high confidence (Karger’s min-
cut algorithm), Storing associative data (Hashing), Error bounds. (7 lectures)  
 
Text Book 
T. H. CORMEN, C. E. LEISERSON, R.L. RIVEST, C. STEIN (2009), Introduction to Algorithms, MIT Press, 
3rd Edition. 
 
Reference Book 
J. KLEINBERG, E. TARDOS (2005), Algorithm Design, Pearson Education, 1st Edition. 
 

 
 
 
  

20 
 



Course Title Human-Machine Interaction Course No. CSL2xx 

Department Computer Science and Engineering, AIDE Structure (L-T-P [C]) 0-0-4 [2] 

Offered for B.Tech (CSE, AIDE)  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None   

Objectives 
To provide a practical understanding of human-machine interaction (HMI) design, including concepts of 
user-centered and design thinking, usability, interfaces, rapid prototyping, and evaluation.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have:  
1. A broad understanding of human-machine interaction and the latest technologies.  
2. Understanding of perceptual and cognitive basis of human-machine interaction.  
3. Knowledge of user-centered design and techniques for rapid prototyping.  
4. Knowledge of assessing usefulness and usability of a design 
5. Introduction to approaches for gathering and analyzing interaction data, and conveying design concepts.  
 
Laboratory and Assignments (primary approach) 
1. Find a poorly designed item (anything). Submit either a picture or sketch and describe why it is poorly 

designed, Heuristic Evaluation and  Interview, User Scenarios, Personas, and Storyboards, User Journeys, 
Wireframes: Paper and Digital Prototyping, Prototype Evaluation Study Design, Value Sensitive Design 
Evaluation  (Week 1-4) 

2. Design visual Interfaces (laptop, mobile) - e.g. gesture-based, Design voice interfaces  - e.g. speech chatbot, 
Design multimodal interactions (Week 5-14) 

 
Text Book 
H. SHARP, J. PREECE, Y. ROGERS (2019), Interaction Design: Beyond Human-Computer Interaction, 
Wiley, 5th Edition.  
 
Online Material 
NPTEL Course, Introduction to Human-Computer Interaction, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106/106/106106177/ 

 
  

21 
 



Course Title Artificial Intelligence Course No. CSL3xx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering, AIDE Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech (CSE, AIDE)  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Data Structures and Algorithms    
Objectives 
To provide the foundations for AI problem solving techniques and knowledge representation formalisms. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify and formulate appropriate AI methods for solving a problem.  
2. Implement AI algorithms 
3. Compare different AI algorithms in terms of design issues, computational complexity, and assumptions  
 
Contents  
Introduction: Uninformed search strategies, Greedy best-first search, And-Or search, Uniform cost search, 
A* search, Memory-bounded heuristic search (5 Lectures)  
Local Search Techniques: Beam Search, Hill Climbing Search, Genetic Search techniques (2 lectures) 
Constraint Satisfaction Problems: Backtracking search for CSPs, Local search for CSPs (4 Lectures)  
Adversarial Search: Optimal Decision in Games, The minimax algorithm, Alpha-Beta pruning, Expectimax 
search (5 Lectures)  
Knowledge and Reasoning: Propositional Logic, Reasoning Patterns in propositional logic; First order logic: 
syntax, semantics, Inference in First order logic, unification and lifting, backward chaining, resolution (7 
Lectures)  
Representation: Information extraction, representation techniques, foundations of Ontology (4 Lectures) 
Planning:  Situation Calculus, Deductive planning, STRIPES, sub-goal, Partial order planner (4 Lectures)  
Bayesian Network and causality: Probabilistic models, directed and undirected models, inferencing, 
reasoning, causality (6 lectures)  
RL: MDP, Policy, Q-value (5 Lectures)   
 
Text Book 
S. RUSSEL, P. NORVIG (2020), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, Pearson, 4th Edition.  
 
Reference Books 
1. E. RICH, K. KNIGHT, S. B. NAIR (2017), Artificial Intelligence, McGraw Hill Education, 3rd Edition. 
2. J. PEARL (2009), Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference, Cambridge University Press, 2nd 

Edition. 
3. D. KOLLER, N. FRIEDMAN (2009), Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles and Techniques, MIT Press 

 
 
 
  

22 
 



Course Title Deep Learning Course No. CSL4xx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering, AIDE Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-3 [4.5] 
Offered for B.Tech. AIDE Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Introduction to Machine Learning/Pattern   

Recognition and Machine Learning 
Objectives 
The objective of this course is  
1. To introduce students through some of the latest techniques in deep learning. 
2. Hands on and the students should be able to design intelligent deep learning systems for solving the 

problems in the area of their interests.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand various deep learning models such CNN, Autoencoders, RNN etc. 
2. Analyze various applications solved through the use of deep learning models 
3. Design and implement their own deep learning models for the problem of their choice 
 
Contents  
Neural networks: DL Optimizers (SGD, MBGD, AdaGrad, Adam) and Regularization, Initialization Methods  
(7 Lectures) 
DL Models: Autoencoder, Convolutional Neural Networks, Recurrent Neural Networks, LSTM, Network 
Architecture Search (NAS) (14 Lectures) 
Deep Generative Models: Deep Belief Networks, Variational Autoencoders, Generative Adversarial 
Networks, Deep Convolutional GAN (12 Lectures) 
Representation learning: Unsupervised Pre-training, Transfer learning and Domain adaptation, Distributed 
representation, Discovering underlying causes (9 Lectures) 
 
Laboratory 
Autoencoder, CNN, LSTM, DBM, GANs (variants), Transfer Learning, NLM, Graph NN, Adversarial losses 
 
Text Book 
I. GOODFELLOW, Y. BENGIO, A. COURVILLE (2016), Deep Learning, The MIT Press, 1st Edition.  
 
Reference Books 
1. A. ZHANG, Z. LIPTON, M. LI, A. SMOLA (2020) Dive into Deep Learning (Release 0.7.1), 

https://d2l.ai/d2l-en.pdf. 
2. D. FOSTER (2019), Generative Deep Learning, O'Reilly Media, 1st Edition. 
 
Self-learning Material 
1. Practical Machine Learning with Tensorflow, NPTEL Course Material, Department Computer Science 

and Engineering, IIT Madras: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106213/ 
2. Stanford CS class (CS231n), Convolutional Neural Networks for Visual Recognition: 

http://cs231n.github.io/ 
 

 
  

23 
 



Course Title Dependable Artificial Intelligence Course No. CSL4xx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering, AIDE Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech (AIDE) Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Introduction to Machine Learning/Pattern Preferred Knowledge  Deep 

Recognition and Machine Learning, AI Learning 
(same 
semester) 

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide characteristic details of AI and machine learning systems to make them dependable, such as 
explainability, interpretability, safety etc.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Assess the dependability of AI systems. 
2. Develop explainable, robust, and safe AI models. 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Overview, Motivation, Challenges – medical and surveillance (3 Lectures)  
Explainable AI: Accuracy-explainabilityTradeoff, Interpretability Problem, Predictability, Transparency, 
Traceability, Causality, Reasoning, Attention and Saliency (10 Lectures)  
Interpretable AI: Prediction Consistency, Application Level Evaluation, Human Level Evaluation, 
Function Level Evaluation (5 Lectures)  
Adversarial Robustness: Adversarial Attacks and Defences (8 Lectures)  
Trustworthy AI: Integrity, Reproducibility, Accountability (2 Lectures)  
Bias-free AI: Accessibility, Fair, Data Agnostics Design, Disentanglement (4 Lectures) 
Privacy Preserving AI:Federated Learning, Differential Privacy and Encrypted Computation (6 Lectures) 
Verified AI:Environment and Specification Modeling, Design with Formal Inductive  Synthesis,  
Evaluation Platforms for AI Safety (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks  
1. J. PEARL (2018), The Book of Why: The New Science of Cause and Effect, Basic Books.  
2. N. BOSTROM (2014), The Ethics of Artificial Intelligence. The Cambridge Handbook of Artificial 

Intelligence, Cambridge University Press. 
 
Self-learning Material 
Udacity course on Secure and Private AI: https://www.udacity.com/course/secure-and-private-ai--
ud185 

 
 
 
 
  

24 
 



Title Data Engineering Course No. CSLXXX 

Department Computer Science and Engineering, Maths Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-3 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech (AIDE) Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Principles of Computer System - II/ Antirequisite Database 

Operating System Systems  
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce fundamental concepts in representing data, accessing it and analysing it 
2. Explore applications in data science and big data projects 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Develop suitable data science ecosystem for the given application 
2. Understand various data storage and retrieval techniques 
3. Understand SQL and NoSQL databases and their usage 
4. Analyse data using Python and Python-based tools 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Data source, Big Data, Structured and unstructured data  (2 Lectures) 
Data Models and Storage: Relational databases, NoSQL database,  normalized and denormalized data 
models, Data cleaning, Distributed Data Storage and Management, Hashing, Indexing ( 14 Lectures) 
Query processing:  Querying big data using SQL and NoSQL, Elastic Search, Query optimization, 
speeding up, maintaining ACID property, Design Patterns,  Data reliability, quality and provenance, 
Distributed query processing, Query optimization and Processing (16 Lectures) 
Data Warehousing: OLAP, OLTP (4 Lectures) 
Streaming Data analytics: In-memory Analytics, data pipelines and dashboards, Predictive Analytics (6 
Lectures) 
 
Laboratory 
Lab exercises should be in accordance with the theory Lectures. The lab sessions may cover the 
following topics: 
1. Data Collection Techniques 
2. Indexing implementation for the structured data and unstructured data 
3. SQL queries (schema, DDL, DML, DQL) 
4. Data format interchange using XML, JSON 
5. NoSQL system (HBase, Hive, MongoDB) 
6. Data wrangling, data operations (e.g. NumPy) 
7. Hadoop, Spark and MapReduce 
 
Textbooks 
1. M. KLEPPMANN (2017), Designing Data-Intensive Applications The Big Ideas Behind Reliable, 

Scalable, and Maintainable Systems, O’Reilly. 
2. L. WEISE (2015), Advanced Data Management: For SQL, NoSQL, Cloud and Distributed Databases, 

Walter de Gruyter GmbH. 
3. A. SILBERSCHATZ, H.F. KORTH, S. SUDARSHAN (2011), Database System Concepts, McGraw Hill 

Publications, 6th Edition. 
 
Reference books 
1. H.G. MOLINA, J. ULLMAN, J. WIDOM (2014), Database Systems: The Complete Book, Pearson, 2nd 

Edition. 
2. P. RAJ, A. RAMAN, D. NAGARAJ, S. DUGGIRALA (2015), High-Performance Big-Data Analytics: 

Computing Systems and Approaches, Springer, 1st Edition. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. NPTEL course on ‘Indexing and Searching Techniques in Databases’ by Dr Arnab Bhattacharya, IIT 

Kanpur: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106/104/106104021/ 
2. NPTEL course on ‘NOC: Fundamentals of Database Systems’ by Dr Arnab Bhattacharya, IIT Kanpur: 

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106/104/106104135/ 
 
 

25 
 



Course Title Data Visualization Course No. CSL4xx 
Department Maths, CSE Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-3 [4.5] 
Offered for B.Tech (AIDE) Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Data Engineering / DBMS   
Objectives 
The instructor will 
1. Explain techniques and algorithms for creating effective visualizations based on principles from graphic 

design.  
2. Introduce several industry-standard software tools to create a compelling and interactive visualization of 

various types of data.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. An understanding of the key techniques and theory used in visualization, including data models, graphical 

perception, and techniques for visual encoding and interaction. 
2. Exposure to a number of common data domains and corresponding analysis tasks, including multivariate 

data, networks, text, and cartography. 
3. Practical experience building and evaluating visualization systems. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Data for Graphics, Design principles, Value for visualization, Categorical, time series, and 
statistical data graphics, Introduction to Visualization Tools (3 Lectures) 
Graphics Pipeline: Introduction, Primitives: vertices, edges, triangles, Model transforms: translations, 
rotations, scaling, View transform, Perspective transform, window transform (3 Lectures). 
Aesthetics and Perception: Graphical Perception Theory, Experimentation, and the Application, Graphical 
Integrity, Layering and Separation, Color and Information, Using Space Effectively (5 Lectures) 
Visualization Design: Visual Display of Quantitative Information, Data-Ink Maximization, Graphical Design, 
Exploratory Data Analysis, Heat Map (8 Lectures) 
Multidimensional Data: Query, Analysis and Visualization of Multi-dimensional Relational Databases, 
Interactive Exploration, tSNE (5 Lectures) 
Interaction: Interactive Dynamics for Visual Analysis, Visual Queries, Finding Patterns in Time Series Data, 
Trend visualization, Animation, Dashboard, Visual Storytelling (8 Lectures) 
Collaboration: Graph Visualization and Navigation, Online Social Networks, Social Data Analysis, 
Collaborative Visual Analytics, Text, Map, Geospatial data (10 Lectures) 
 
Laboratory 
Visualization Design, Exploratory data analysis, Interactive Visualization Tools like Tableau, Gephi, D3, etc. 
Mini Project. 
 
Text Books 
1. E. TUFTE (2001), The Visual Display of Quantitative Information, Graphics Press, 2nd Edition. 
2. J. KOPONEN, J. HILDÉN (2019), Data Visualization Handbook, CRC Press.  
 
Reference Books 
1. M. LIMA (2014), The Book of Trees: Visualizing Branches of Knowledge, Princeton Architectural Press. 
2. R. TAMASSIA (2013), Handbook of Graph Drawing and Visualization, CRC Press. 
3. S. MURRAY (2017), Interactive Data Visualization for the Web, O'Reilly Press, 2nd Edition. 
 

 
  

26 
 



Course Title Maths for Big Data Course No. MAL3XXX 
Department Mathematics Structure (L-T-P [C]) 2-1-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech (AI & DS) Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Mathematics - II, Probability, Statistics and Antirequisite CSL7093 

Stochastic Processes  
Objectives 
To introduce basic concepts and core techniques which enable the students to handle large o equip students 
with sufficient knowledge of core techniques which can be used by the students in their respective fields of 
interest. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Understanding of novel techniques to handle a large amount of data.  
2. Develop concepts and tools to ingest, process and analyse massive data in real time.  

 
Contents  
Statistical Methods: Multivariate Analysis, Sampling theory: simple random sampling, stratified sampling, 
cluster sampling, ratio and regression estimators, two stage sampling, Compressive sensing. (14 Lectures) 
Numerical linear algebra: Spectral decomposition, Schur Decomposition, QR Factorization, Singular value 
decomposition (SVD), PCA for large matrices, Algorithms for big matrices, Least square approximations, 
Low-Rank Approximation, Manifolds. (14 Lectures)  
 
Text Books 
1. D. MINER, A. SHOOK (2016), Mapreduce Design Patterns: Building Effective Algorithms and 

Analytics for Hadoop and Other Systems, O'Reilly Media. 
2. V. MAYER-SCHÖNBERGER, K. CUKIER (2013), Big Data: A Revolution that Will Transform How We 

Live, Work, and Think, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. 
3. N. MARZ, J. WARREN (2015), Big Data: Principles and Best Practices of Scalable Real-time Data 

Systems, Manning. 
 
Reference Books 
1. M. MITTAL, V.E. BALAS, D.J. HEMANTH, R. KUMAR (2018), Data Intensive Computing Applications 

for Big Data, IOS Press. 
2. B. FURHT, A. ESCALANTE, (Eds.), Handbook of Data Intensive Computing, Springer, 2011, 1st 

Edition. 
3. G. STRANG (2005), Linear Algebra and its Applications, Cengage Learning, 4th Edition. 

 
  

27 
 



Course Title Optimization in ML Course No. CSL4xx 
Department Mathematics Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-3 [4.5] 
Offered for B.Tech (AIDE) Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite PRML or Introduction to ML Antirequisite Optimization 
Objectives 
1. To understand the theory of optimization methods and algorithms developed for solving various types of 

optimization problems 
2. To apply the mathematical results and numerical techniques of optimization theory to Machine Learning 

problems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Compose existing theoretical analysis with new aspects and algorithm variants. 
2. Formulate the most important optimization algorithms for machine learning applications 
 
Contents 
Introduction to optimization: Machine Learning and Optimization, linear and non-linear optimization, 
discrete optimization, Network flows, convex sets, functions. (14 Lectures) 
Regularizations and SGD: L1 and L2 regularization, First-order methods: gradient descent, acceleration and 
subgradient method, Stochastic gradient methods, SGD heuristics and tricks, escaping saddle points. (14 
Lectures) 
Other topics relevant to optimization for ML: Interior point and cutting-plane methods for ML, Min-Max 
Problems  (convex-concave and nonconvex),Non-Euclidean and Submodular optimization. (14 Lectures) 
 
Reference Books 
1. S. BOYD, L. VANDENBERGHE (2003), Convex Optimization, Cambridge University Press. 
2. S. SRA, S. NOWOZIN, S. WRIGHT, (Eds.), Optimization for Machine Learning, MIT Press, 2011. 
3. E. HAZAN (2019), Lecture Notes: Optimization for Machine Learning 

[https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.03550]. 
4. D. BERTSEKAS (2016), Nonlinear Programming, Athena Scientific, 3rd Edition. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. http://suvrit.de/teach/6881/  

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
  

28 
 



Course Title Ethics, Policy, Law and Regulations in AI  Course No. CSL7xx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, MTech, PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, AI   
Objectives 
1. To understand implications and consequences of ethics, law, Regulations (data - privacy, ownership, data 

marketplace, etc) Policy in AI 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to develop an understanding of: 
1. Ramifications of AI technologies on society 
2. Ethical aspects of AI, ML and DS systems 
3. Data privacy, ownership and IPR issues  
4. Law, Regulations, Liabilities and Policies of AI, ML and DS systems 
 
Contents  
Ethics in AI  
Law and Regulations 
IPR  
Policies 
Case Studies  
 
Text Book 
1. Online resources  
2. Will be added in future  
 
Reference Books 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
  

29 
 



15. Detailed Course Content of Programme Elective Courses 
 
Course Title Advanced Machine Learning Course No. CSL7xx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering, AIDE Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, MTech, PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite PRML/Introduction to ML, AI   
Objectives 
This is an advanced course on Machine Learning. It is intended for senior undergraduate and graduate 
students who already have a background in PR or ML. The course is designed as a set of special topics that 
will be covered through research papers and books. The course will focus on algorithms and models along 
with providing a good perspective of different real world applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the algorithms and functioning of advanced techniques and concepts such as deep learning, 

distance metric learning, and domain adaptation 
2. Understand the advantages and limitations of the algorithms and their potential applications 
3. Run several public domain machine learning toolboxes on real world databases such as MNIST and 

CIFAR10 
4. Design experiments for evaluation and analyze the results to test the effectiveness of individual 

components of an algorithm 
 
Contents  
Kernel Machines: Kernel properties, Kernels for structure data and text, Multiple kernel learning, 
Generative models (3 Lectures) 
Variants of Support Vector Machine: Hard and soft margin SVM, Online SVM, Distributed SVM (3 
Lectures) 
PAC Theory (6 Lectures) 
Boosting: Adaboost, Gradient boosting (2 Lectures) 
Structured Prediction and Graphical Models: Learning directed and undirected models, Sampling, MAP 
inference and prediction, variational inference, causality (14 Lectures)  
Dictionary Learning: Fundamentals, Regularization, Supervised and unsupervised dictionary, learning,  
Transform learning (6 Lectures) 
Deep Reinforcement Learning (8 Lectures)   
 
Text Books 
1. N. CRISTIANINI, J. S-TAYLOR (2000), An Introduction to Support Vector Machines and Other Kernel-

based Learning Methods, Cambridge University Press, 1st Edition.  
2. B. SCHOLKOPF, A. J. SMOLA (2001), Learning with Kernels: Support Vector Machines, Regularization, 

Optimization, and Beyond, The MIT Press, 2001, 1st Edition.  
3. R. S. SUTTON, A. G. BARTO (2018), Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction, The MIT Press, 2nd 

Edition. 
4. D. KOLLER, N. FRIEDMAN (2009), Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles and Techniques, MIT 

Press. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

30 
 



Course Title Advanced Artificial Intelligence Course No. CSL7xx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering, AIDE Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, MTech, PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning   
 
Objectives 
To cover modern paradigms of AI that go beyond traditional learning 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop an understanding of modern concepts in AI and where they can be used 
2. Design, implement and apply novel AI techniques based on emerging real-world requirements 
 
Contents  
Making decisions: Utility theory, utility functions, decision networks, sequential decision problems, 
Partially Observable MDPs, Game Theory (14 Lectures)  
Reinforcement Learning: Passive RL, Active RL, Generalization in RL, Policy Search, (7 Lectures) 
Probabilistic Reasoning over time: Hidden Markov Models, Kalman Filters (7 Lectures)  
Knowledge Representation: Ontological engineering, Situation Calculus, semantic networks, description 
logic (6 Lectures)  
Planning: Planning with state space search, Partial-Order Planning, Planning Graphs, Planning with 
Propositional Logic, hierarchical task network planning, non-deterministic domains, conditional planning, 
continuous planning, multi-agent planning (8 Lectures)  
 
Text Book 
1. S. RUSSEL, P. NORVIG (2009), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, Pearson, 3rd Edition. 
 
Reference Book 
1. E. RICH, K. KNIGHT, S. B. NAIR (2017), Artificial Intelligence, McGraw Hill Education, 3rd Edition. 
2. R.S. SUTTON, A.G. BARTO (2015), Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction, The MIT Press, 2nd 

Edition. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

31 
 



Course Title Natural Language Understanding Course No. CSL7xx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, MTech, PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Pattern Recognition and Machine   

Learning/Machine Learning 1 
 
Objectives 
1. To provide insights into fundamental concepts and algorithms related to Natural Language 

Understanding. 
2. Impart working expertise by introducing practical problems. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Formulate natural language understanding tasks 
2. Design and implement basic applications of NLU 
 
Contents 
Traditional NLU: Introduction to NLU, Motivation, Morphology, Parts-of-Speech, Language Models,  
Word Sense Disambiguation, Anaphora Resolution, Basics of Supervised and Semi-supervised Learning for 
NLU, Hidden Markov Models for language modeling, EM Algorithm, Structured Prediction, Dependency 
Parsing, Topic Models, Semantic Parsing, Sentiment analysis. (14 Lectures) 

Deep Learning for NLU: Intro to Neural NLU, Word Vector representations, Neural Networks and 
backpropagation -- for named entity recognition, Practical tips: gradient checks, overfitting, regularization, 
activation functions,  Recurrent neural networks -- for language modeling and other tasks, GRUs and LSTMs 
-- for machine translation, Recursive neural networks -- for parsing, Convolutional neural networks -- for 
sentence classification, Question answering and dialogue system, Graph Neural Network for NLU, Natural 
Language Generation, Analysis and Interpretability of Neural NLU. (22 Lectures) 

Knowledge Graphs: Knowledge graph embedding techniques, Inference on knowledge graphs. (6 Lectures) 
 
Text Book 
1. C. MANNING, H. SCHÜTZE (1999), Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing, MIT 

Press. 
2. D. JURAFSKY, J.H. MARTIN, Speech and Language Processing: An Introduction to Natural Language 

Processing, Computational Linguistics and Speech Recognition (3rd Edition Draft), 2019. 
 
Reference Books 
1. E. BENDER (2013), Linguistic Fundamentals for NLP, Morgan Claypool Publishers.. 
2. J. ALLEN (1995), Natural Language Understanding, Pearson Education, 1995. 
3. Research Literature. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. http://web.stanford.edu/class/cs224n/index.html#schedule (Deep learning for NLP) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

32 
 



Course Title Neuromorphic Design and Computing Course No. CSL7xx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, MTech, PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Artificial Intelligence, PRML/Introduction to ML    
 
Objectives 
1. To provide information about neuroscientific progress towards reverse-engineering the brain 
2. To provide essentials on key hardware building blocks, system level VLSI design and practical real-

world applications of neuromorphic Systems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. View neuromorphic computing as a computer architecture research problem 
2. Perform software and hardware implementation of basic biological neural circuits 
 
Contents  
(Fractal 1) 
Foundational Concepts: Introduction to neuromorphic engineering, neuroanatomy of human brain, 
signaling and operation of biological neurons, neuron models - LIF, IF, HH, synapses and plasticity rules, 
spike-time-dependent plasticity (STDP), biological neural circuits, non-von Neumann computing approach, 
learning rules, retina, cochlea. (14 Lectures) 

(Fractal 2) 
Neuromorphic Computing: Spiking Neural Networks (SNN), Advanced Nanodevices for Neuron 
Implementation, Synaptic emulation - non-volatile memory (NVM), Flash, RRAM, memristors, CNT, Case 
study on Intel’s Loihi neuromorphic chip. (14 Lectures) 

(Fractal 3) 
Hardware Implementation: Electronic synapses, Digital/Analog neuromorphic VLSI, Hardware 
Implementation of Neuron circuits, Hardware Implementation of Synaptic and Learning circuits, 
Synaptic programming methodology optimization. (14 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. S. C. LIU (2002), Analog VLSI: Circuits and Principles, MIT Press.  
2. R. KOZMA (2012), Advances in Neuromorphic Memristor Science, Springer.  
3. E. KANDEL (2012), Principles of Neural Science, McGraw Hill. 
 

 
 
  

33 
 



Course Title Information Retrieval Course No. CSLXXX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite PRML/Introduction to ML   
 
Objectives 
Information retrieval covers the tasks of indexing, searching, and recalling data, particularly text or other 
unstructured forms. It has an important role to play in a large number of applications viz., digital libraries, 
office automation, internet and e-commerce. The aim of the course is to study theoretical aspects as well 
as implementation issues of classical and modern retrieval problems. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to learn and gather expertise in: 
1. The underlying technologies of modern information retrieval system 
2. Developing new search engines with high search accuracy 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Information Retrieval: The nature of unstructured and semi-structured text, Inverted 
index and Boolean queries. (2 Lectures) 
Search Engine Architecture: Basic building blocks of a modern search engine system:  web crawler, basic 
text analysis techniques, Inverted index, Query processing, Search result interface, Semantic search using 
Ontology (7 Lectures) 
Retrieval Models: Boolean vector space, TFIDF, Okapi, Probabilistic language modeling, Latent semantic 
indexing, Vector space scoring, The cosine measure, Efficiency considerations, Document length 
normalization, Relevance feedback and query expansion, Rocchio, Ontological models (8 Lectures) 
Performance Evaluation: Evaluating search engines, User happiness, Precision, Recall, F-measure, 
Creating Test collections: kappa measure, Interjudge agreement. (5 Lectures) 
Text Categorization and Filtering: Introduction to text classification, Naive Bayes model, Spam filtering, 
Vector space classification using hyperplanes, Centroids, K-Nearest Neighbors, Support vector machine 
classifiers, Kernel functions, Boosting. (6 Lectures) 
Text Clustering: Clustering versus classification, Partitioning methods, K-means clustering, Gaussian 
mixture model, Hierarchical agglomerative clustering, Clustering terms using documents. (6 Lectures) 
Advanced Topics: Summarization, Topic detection and tracking, Personalization, Question answering, 
Cross language information retrieval (3 Lectures) 
Web Information Retrieval: Hypertext, web crawling, Search engines, Ranking, Link analysis, PageRank, 
HITS. (3 Lectures) 
Retrieving Structured Documents: XML retrieval, Semantic web (2 Lectures) 

 
Textbooks 

1. C.D. MANNING, P. RAGHAVAN, H. SCHUETZE (2008), Introduction to Information Retrieval, 
Cambridge University Press.  

2. B. CROFT, D. METZLER, T. STROHMAN (2010), Search Engines: Information Retrieval in Practice, 
Pearson Education.  

3. B. RICARDO, B. RIBEIRO-NETO (2011), Modern Information Retrieval, Addison-Wesley, 2nd 
Edition. 

 
 

  

34 
 



Course Title Resource Constrained AI  Course No. CSL7xx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering, AIDE Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, MTech, PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Artificial Intelligence, Introduction to Machine   

Learning/PRML 
 
Objectives 
1. To provide motivation and understanding of the need and importance of deploying Machine Learning 

in resource constrained devices  
2. To provide details about various optimized and resource efficient algorithms in Machine Learning 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the constraints of implementing AI algorithms on limited memory devices 
2. Design and develop techniques to reduce inference time memory footprint of machine learning models 
 
Contents  
Introduction:Overview and motivation, challenges of resource constrained AI, why AI on edge (4 Lectures) 
Edge Computing:Edge devices and their limitations, Edge and fog computing, Distributed computing, 
communication links, communication overhead in IoT devices (8 Lectures)  
Monitoring: Prediction accuracy, numeric accuracy, precision, memory footprints, computational 
complexity of AI models (4 Lectures) 
Memory Optimization of Models:KiloByte-size models, floating-point v/s fixed-point, SeeDot (8 Lectures) 
Edge AI:Resource-efficient kNN, SVM and deep learning models, Toeplitz matrix, Bonsai, ProtoNN, EMI-
RNN, FastRNN, FastGRNN (10 Lectures) 
Current Trends and Future:Hardware accelerators for Edge AI, Vision Processing Unit (VPU), Streaming 
Hybrid Architecture Vector Engine (SHAVE), Intel’s Movidius Neural Compute Stick (NCS), Open Neural 
Network Exchange (ONNX), Future trends (10 Lectures) 
 
Laboratory  
Implementation of Bonsai, CNN training using SeeDot language.  
 
Text Book 
1. C. ALIPPI (2014), Intelligence for Embedded Systems: A Methodological Approach, Springer, 1st 

Edition. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. EdgeML by Microsoft,https://github.com/Microsoft/EdgeML/#edge-machine-learning 
2. NCSDK by Intelhttps://github.com/movidius/ncsdk 
 

 
 
 
 
  

35 
 



Title Social Networks Course No. CSL4XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   

 
Objectives 
Provide introduction to social network analysis, its mathematical foundation and application. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected 
1. To gain the ability to understand the applications related to social networks 
2. Write program with social network datasets and Formulate real-world problems with any relational 

data set resembling social networks 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Graphs, Social Networks, Network Types, Network Data Sets, Gephi for Network Analysis 
(5 Lectures) 
Network Properties: Network Measures, Strong and Weak Ties, Homophily, Structural Balance, 
Components (4 Lectures) 
Network Models: Random Networks, Scale Free Networks, The Barabási-Albert Model, Erdos-Renyi Model 
(5 Lectures) 
Structural Analysis of Networks using Python: Python for Network Analysis, Empirical Studies, Structural 
Properties, Generate Synthetic Networks, Working with signed networks (5 Lectures) 
Social Network Applications: Information Cascades, Small-World Phenomenon, Epidemics, Community 
Detection, Link Prediction, Page Rank (14 Lectures) 
Evolving Network and Temporal Networks: Network evolution, working with Temporal Network Data  (5 
Lectures) 
Multiplex and Multi-layer network (1 Lecture) 
Network Analysis in Other Fields:Network Analysis in Biology, Sports, Transports (3 Lectures)  
 
Textbooks 
1. D. EASLEY, J. KLEINBERG (2010), Networks, Crowds, and Markets: Reasoning About a Highly 

Connected World, Cambridge University Press. 
(http://www.cs.cornell.edu/home/kleinber/networks-book/) 

2. A. BARABASI (2016), Network Science, Cambridge University Press. 
(http://barabasi.com/networksciencebook/) 

3. M. NEWMAN (2018), Networks, Oxford University Press, 2nd Edition. 
(https://global.oup.com/academic/product/networks-9780198805090?cc=us&lang=en&#/)  

 
Reference Books 
1. C. GROS (2015), Complex and Adaptive Dynamical Systems, Springer, Springer, 4th Edition. 
2. E. ESTRADA (2011), The Structure of Complex Networks Theory and Applications, Oxford University 

Press. 
3. W. de NOOY, A. MRVAR, V. BATAGELJ (2018), Exploratory Social Network Analysis with Pajek, 

Cambridge University Press, 3rd Edition. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. https://www.barabasilab.com/course 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106169/# 
 

 
  

36 
 



Course Title Stream Analytics Course No. CSLxxx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech 3rd and 4th years; PG  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Introduction to Machine Learning, PRML    
 
Objectives 
Provide background on some of the important models, algorithms, and applications related to stream data.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
Ability to understand and apply the practical and algorithmic aspects related to various topics of data 
streams 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Stream and mining algorithms. (2 Lectures)  
Clustering Massive Data Streams: Micro-clustering based stream mining, Clustering evolving data 
streams, Online Micro-cluster maintenance, High-dimensional projected stream clustering, Classification 
of data streams using micro-clustering, On-demand stream classification, Applications of micro-
clustering. (12 Lectures)  
Classification Methods in Data Streams: Ensemble based classification, Very fast decision trees, On-
demand classification, Online Information Network. (6 Lectures)  
Distributed Mining of Data Streams: Outlier and anomaly detection, Clustering, Frequent itemset mining, 
Classification, Summarization. (6 Lectures)  
Change Diagnosis Algorithms in Evolving Data Streams: Velocity density method, Clustering for 
characterizing stream evolution. (4 Lectures)  
Multidimensional Analysis of Data Streams using Stream Cubes: Architecture for online analysis of data 
streams, Stream data cube computation, Performance study. (6 Lectures)  
Dimensionality Reduction and Forecasting on Streams: Principal Component Analysis, Auto-regressive 
models and recursive least squares, Tracking correlations and hidden variables. (6 Lectures)  
 
Text Book 
C.C. AGGARWAL, (Ed.), Data Stream: Models and Algorithms, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2007. 
 

 
  

37 
 



Title Computer Vision Course No. CSLXXX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering, AIDE Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M.Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Linear Algebra   

 
Objectives  
 The Instructor will:  
1.   Provide insights into fundamental concepts and algorithms behind some of the remarkable  
      success of Computer Vision  
2.   Impart working expertise by means of programming assignments and a project  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Learn and appreciate the usage and implications of various Computer Vision techniques in real-world 

scenarios  
2.   Design and implement basic applications of Computer Vision  

 
Contents  
Introduction: The Three R’s - Recognition, Reconstruction, Reorganization (1 Lecture)  
Fundamentals: Formation, Filtering, Transformation, Alignment, Color (5 Lectures) 
Image Restoration: Spatial Processing and Wavelet-based Processing (5 Lectures) 
Geometry:Homography, Warping, Epipolar Geometry, Stereo, Structure from Motion, Optical flow (9 Lectures) 
Segmentation:Key point Extraction, Region Segmentation (e.g., boosting, graph-cut and level-set), RANSAC (6 
Lectures) 
Feature Description and Matching:Key-point Description, handcrafted feature extraction (SIFT, LBP) (3 
Lectures) 
Deep Learning based Segmentation and Recognition: DL-based Object detection (e.g. Mask-RCNN, YOLO), 
Semantic Segmentation, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based approaches to visual recognition (9 
Lectures)  
Applications: Multimodal and Multitask Applications (4 Lectures)  
 
Textbooks  
1. R. HARTLEY, A. ZISSERMAN (2004), Multiple View Geometry in Computer Vision, Cambridge University 

Press, 2nd Edition.  
2. R. SZELISKI, (2010), Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications, Springer-Verlag London. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Research literature  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

38 
 



Course Title Introduction to AR and VR  Course No. CSL7xx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, MTech, PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Graphics   
 
Objectives 
1. To discuss issues focusing upon the human element of VR.  
2. To explain the Hardware and software related issues related to VR.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Explain perceptual concepts governing virtual reality.  
2. Identify and solve the issues of various virtual reality frameworks.  
3. Design immersive experience using VR Software 
 
Contents  
(Fractal 1) 
Introduction: Definition of X-R (AR, VR, MR), modern experiences, historical perspective, Hardware, 
sensors, displays, software, virtual world generator, game engines (6 Lectures) 
Geometry of Visual World: Geometric modeling, transforming rigid bodies, yaw, pitch, roll, axis-angle 
representation, quaternions, 3D rotation inverses and conversions, homogeneous transforms, transforms to 
displays, look-at, and eye transform, canonical view and perspective transform, viewport transforms (8 
Lectures) 

(Fractal 2)  
Light and Optics: Interpretation of light, reflection, optical systems (4 Lectures)  
Visual Perception: Photoreceptors, Eye and Vision, Motion, Depth Perception, Frame rates and displays 
(6 Lectures) 
Tracking: Orientation, Tilt, Drift, Yaw, Lighthouse approach (4 Lectures) 

(Fractal 3) 
Head Mounted Display: Optics, Inertial Measurement Units, Orientation Tracking with IMUs, Panoramic 
Imaging and Cinematic VR, Audio (8 Lectures) 
Frontiers: Touch, haptics, taste, smell, robotic interfaces, telepresence, brain-machine interfaces (6 
Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. M. SHIRLEY (2016), Fundamentals of Computer Graphics, CRC Press, 4th Edition.  
2. LA VALLE (2016), Virtual Reality, Cambridge University Press.  
 
Reference Books 
1. J. JERALD (2015), The VR Book: Human-Centered Design for Virtual Reality, Morgan & Claypool.  
2. G. MATHER (2016), Foundations of Sensation and Perception, Psychology Press, 3rd Edition.  
3. S. MARSCHNER, P. SHIRLEY (2015), Fundamentals of Computer Graphics, CRC Press, 4th Edition.  
4. D. A. BOWMAN, E. KRUIJFF, J. J. LAVIOLA, I. POUPYREV (2017), 3D User Interfaces: Theory and 

Practice, Addison Wesley Professional, 2nd Edition. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Virtual Reality, NPTEL, IIT Madras,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106138/. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

39 
 



Course Title Advanced Biometrics  Course No. CSL7xx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering, AIDE Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, MTech, PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Pattern Recognition and Machine   

Learning/Deep Learning/Machine Learning 1 
 
Objectives 
1. To familiarize the students with types of biometrics including physical and behavioural modalities, 

understanding biometric strengths, weaknesses and limitations, and biometric standards.  
2. Describe a few techniques for designing biometric systems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop new biometric systems for real-world applications, and become familiar with various stages of 

biometric system development.   
2. Develop an understanding of future direction and emerging technologies in biometrics.   
 
Contents  
Introduction:Biometric system design, Genesis of biometrics: human body properties, and biometric data 
acquisition, System architecture, Performance Evaluation: Verification, Identification (4 Lectures)  
Traditional and Emerging Biometric Modalities: Image/signal processing, Fingerprint matching, face 
recognition, iris modelling, signature authentication, biometric pattern recognition, multi-modal biometrics 
(23 Lectures) 
Biometric Security: Encryption, cancelable biometrics and fuzzy vault (6 Lectures)  
Biometric Devices: Security-Target design, Reliability design, Industry standards (6 Lectures)  
Biomedical applications of Biometrics (3 Lectures)  
 
Text Book 
1. A.K. JAIN, A. ROSS, K. NANDAKUMAR (2011), Introduction to Biometrics, Springer. 
 
Reference Books 
1. A.K. JAIN, A. ROSS, K. NANDAKUMAR, (Eds.), Handbook of Biometrics, Springer, 2008. 
2. S.Z. LI, A.K. JAIN, (Eds.), Handbook of Face Recognition, Springer, 2011, 2nd Edition. 
3. D. MALTONI, D. MAIO, A. JAIN, S. PRABHAKAR, (Eds.), Handbook of Fingerprint Recognition, 

Springer, 2009, 2nd Edition. 
4. M.J. BURGE, K.W. BOWYER, (Eds.), Handbook of Iris Recognition, Springer, 2016, 2nd Edition. 
5. On-line resources will be provided. 
 

 
 
  

40 
 



Course Title Computer Graphics Course No. CSL4xx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, MTech, PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Data Structures and Algorithms   
Objectives 
To provide a thorough introduction to computer graphics techniques, focusing on 2D and 3D 
modelling, image synthesis and rendering 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Create and explain graphics primitives and interactive graphics applications in C++  
2. Synthesize and render 2D and 3D worlds for visualization and animation  
 
Contents 
Introduction to Computer Graphics & Graphics Systems: Overview of computer graphics, representing 
pictures, preparing, presenting & interacting with pictures for presentations, OpenGL Primitives (3 
Lectures)  
Scan Conversions: Points & lines, Line drawing algorithms, Circle generation algorithm; Ellipse 
generating algorithm; scan line polygon, fill algorithm, Clipping algorithms: line and polygon, anti-
aliasing (6 Lectures)  
Transformations and Viewing: Basic transformations: translation, rotation, scaling; Matrix 
representations and homogeneous coordinates, transformations between coordinate systems; reflection 
shear; Viewing pipeline, Window to viewport coordinate transformation, clipping operations, viewport 
clipping, 3D viewing (9 Lectures)  
Curves and Surfaces: Conics, parametric and non-parametric forms; Curves and Splines; Surfaces and 
NURBS, 3-D modelling (8 Lectures)  
Hidden Surfaces: Depth comparison, Z-buffer algorithm, Back face detection, BSP tree method, the 
Printer’s algorithm, scan-line algorithm; Hidden line elimination, wire frame methods (6 Lectures)  
Color and Shading Models:Phong's shading model, Gouraud shading, Shadows and background, Color 
models, Photo-realistic rendering, Radiosity (5 Lectures)  
Animation: Functions, pipeline, sample programs for drawing 2-D, 3-D objects; event handling and 
view manipulation (5 Lectures)  
 
Text Book 

1. D. HEARN, P. BAKER (2002), Computer Graphics, Pearson Education India, 2002, 2nd Edition. 
 
Reference Books 
1. J. F. HUGHES, A. VAN DAM, M. McGUIRE, D.F. SKLAR, J. D. FOLEY, S. K. FEINER, K. 

AKELEY (2014), Computer Graphics: Principles and Practices, Addison Wesley, 3rd Edition.  
2. D. F. ROGERS, J. A. ADAMS (1989), Mathematical Elements for Computer Graphics, McGraw 

Hill, 2nd Edition.  
3. Z. XIANG, R. PLASTOCK (2015), Schaum’s Outline of Computer Graphics, McGraw Hill 

Education, 2nd Edition.  
4. J. KESSENICH, G. SELLERS, D. SHREINER (2017), OpenGL Programming Guide, Pearson 

Education, 9th Edition. 
 
Self Learning Material 

  NPTEL Computer Science and Engineering - Computer Graphics:     
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106090/. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

41 
 



Course Title Cyber Security Course No. CS 7XX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite Computer Networks   

Objectives 
The Instructor will provide the skills needed to protect networks, secure electronic assets, prevent 
attacks, ensure the privacy of your customers, and build secure infrastructure. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. To protect data and respond to threats that occur over the Internet 
2. Design and implement risk analysis, security policies, and damage assessment 
3. To Provide contingency operations that include administrative planning process for incident 

response, disaster recovery, and business continuity planning within information security 
 

Contents 
Introduction to Cyber Security: Internet Governance – Challenges and Constraints, Cyber Threats. (2 
Lectures) 
Cyber Security Vulnerabilities and Cyber Security Safeguards:  Cyber Security Vulnerabilities,  Cyber 
Security Safeguards, Access control, Audit, Authentication, Biometrics, Cryptography, Deception, Denial 
of Service Filters, Ethical Hacking, Firewalls, Response, Scanning, Security policy, Threat Management. (8 
Lectures) 
Securing Web Application, Services and Servers: Basic security for HTTP Applications and Services, Basic 
Security for SOAP Services, Identity Management and Web Services, Authorization Patterns, Security 
Considerations, Challenges. (8 Lectures) 
Intrusion Detection and Prevention: Intrusion detection and Prevention Techniques, Anti-Malware 
software, Network based Intrusion detection Systems, Network based Intrusion Prevention Systems, 
Host based Intrusion prevention Systems, Security Information Management, Network Session Analysis, 
System Integrity Validation. (7 Lectures) 
Overview of Firewalls:  Types of Firewalls, User Management, VPN Security Security Protocols: - PGP 
and S/MIME, Security at Transport Layer- SSL and TLS, Security at Network Layer-IPSec. (5 Lectures) 
Cyberspace and the Law:  Cyber Security Regulations, Roles of International Law, the state and Private 
Sector in Cyberspace, Cyber Security Standards. The INDIAN Cyberspace, National Cyber Security 
Policy. (6 Lectures) 
Cyber Forensics: Handling Preliminary Investigations, Controlling an Investigation, Conducting disk-
based analysis, Investigating Information-hiding, Scrutinizing E-mail, Validating E-mail header 
information, Tracing Internet access, Tracing memory in real-time. (6 Lectures) 
 
Laboratory 
1. Design and implementation of a simple client/server model and running application using sockets 

and TCP/IP. 
2. To make students aware of the insecurity of default passwords, printed passwords and passwords 

transmitted in plain text. 
3. To teach students how to use SSH for secure file transfer or for accessing local computers using port 

forwarding technique. 
4. Comparison between Telnet and SSH for Secure Connection 
5. AVISPA Tool  for the Automated Validation of Internet Security Protocols and Applications 
 
Text Book 
C.J. HOOFNAGLE (2016), Federal Trade Commission Privacy Law and Policy, Cambridge University 
Press, 2016.   
 
Self Learning Material  
1. P.W. SINGER, A. FRIEDMAN (2014), Cybersecurity: What Everyone Needs to Know, OUP, 1st Edition. 
2. L. THAMES, D. SCHAEFER (2017), Cybersecurity for Industry 4.0, Springer, 1st Edition.  
3. N. HASSAN, R. HIJAZI (2017), Digital Privacy and Security Using Windows, Apress, 1st Edition. 

 
 
 
 

42 
 



Course Title Distributed Database Systems Course No. CSLXXX 
Department Computer Science & Engineering Structure (L-T-P 3-0-0 [3] 

[C]) 
Offered for B.Tech, MTech, PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisites Operating Systems, Database Systems, Computer   

Networks, Data Communication 
Objective 
To understand and appreciate concepts of distributed database design, and its associated issues of 
consistency, concurrency, optimization, integrity, reliability, privacy, and security. 
 
Learning Outcome 
Ability to understand the need for distributed database systems and its related complexities pertaining to 
fragmentation, replication, availability, concurrency, consistency and recovery. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Distributed data processing concepts, What is a DDBS - advantages, disadvantages and 
problem areas. (2 Lectures) 
Distributed Database Management System Architectures: Transparencies, architecture, global directory 
concepts and issues. (3 Lectures) 
Distributed Database Design: Design strategies, design issues, fragmentation, data allocation. (4 Lectures) 
Semantics Data Control: View management, data security, semantic integrity control. (5 Lectures) 
Query Processing: Objectives, characterization of processors, layers of processing, query decomposition, 
data localization. (5 Lectures) 
Query Optimization: Factors, centralized query optimization, fragmented query ordering, query 
optimization algorithms. (5 Lectures) 
Transaction Management: Goals, properties, models. (4 Lectures) 
Concurrency Control: Concurrency control in centralized systems, concurrency control in DDBSs - 
algorithms, deadlock management. (5 Lectures) 
Reliability: Issues and types of failures, reliability techniques, commit protocols, recovery protocols. (5 
Lectures) 
Other Avenues:  Parallel Database Systems, Multi-databases. (4 Lectures) 
 
Reference Books 
1. S. CERI, G. PELAGATTI (2008), Distributed Databases: Principles and Systems, McGraw-Hill, 1st 

Edition (2017 Reprint). 
2. M.T. ÖZSU, P. VALDURIEZ (2011), Principles of Distributed Database Systems, Springer, 3rd Edition. 
 

 
 

  

43 
 



Title Introduction to Blockchain Course No. CSL 7XX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, MTech, PhD.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  Network Security   

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Explain how blockchain technology works 
2. Integrate blockchain technology into the current business processes to make them secure 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand what and why of Blockchain 
2. Explore major components of Blockchain and Identify a use case for a Blockchain application 
3. Create their own Blockchain network application 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Blockchain:Digital Trust, Asset, Transactions, Distributed Ledger Technology, Types of 
network, Components of blockchain (cryptography, ledgers, consensus, smart contracts). (5 Lectures) 
PKI and Cryptography:Private keys, Public keys, Hashing, Digital Signature. (6 Lectures) 
Consensus:Byzantine Fault, Proof of Work, Proof of Stake. (6 Lectures) 
Cryptocurrency:Bitcoin creation and economy, Limited Supply and Deflation, Hacks, Ethereum concept 
and Ethereum classic. (10 Lectures) 
Hyperledger Fabric:Hyperledger Architecture, Membership, Blockchain, Transaction, Chaincode, 
Hyperledger Fabric, Features of Hyperledger, Fabric Demo. (8 Lectures) 
Blockchain Applications:Building on the Blockchain, Ethereum Interaction - Smart Contract and Token 
(Fungible, non-fungible), Languages,, Blockchain-as-a-service. (6 Lectures) 

 
Textbook  

   A. BAHGA, V. MADISETTI (2017), Blockchain Applications: A Hands-On Approach, VPT. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. M. SWAN (2015), Blockchain: Blueprint for a New Economy, O’Reilly Media. 
2. R. WATTENHOFER (2016), The Science of the Blockchain, CreateSpace Independent Publishing 

Platform. 
3. I. BASHIR (2017), Mastering blockchain, Packt Publishing Ltd. 
4. K.E. LEVY, Book-smart, Not Street-smart: Blockchain-based Smart Contracts and the Social Workings 

of Law, Engaging Science, Technology, and Society, vol. 3, pp. 1-15, 2017.     
 
Preparatory Course Material  

   MIT Online Blockchain Course, Learn Blockchain Technology: https://getsmarter.mit.edu/ 
 
 
 
 
  

44 
 



Title Soft Computing Techniques  Course No. CSL7XXX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering, Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3–0–0 [3] 

AIDE 
Offered for B.Tech, M.Tech. 1st Year, Ph.D. 1st Year  Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   

Objectives 
Introduction of different soft computing techniques, their integration and applications. 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify and describe soft computing techniques 
2. Understand soft computing approaches in problem solving 
3. Formulate real-world methodologies to data mining using soft computing tools 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Soft Computing: Difference between soft and hard computing, Fuzzy Computing, Neural 
Computing, Genetic Algorithms, Associative Memory, Adaptive Resonance Theory, Applications (4 
Lectures) 
Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Systems: Membership functions, Fuzzy operations, Fuzzy relations, Fuzzy 
proposition, Fuzzy implication, Fuzzification, Fuzzy inference, Fuzzy rule based systems, Defuzzification 
(7 Lectures) 
Genetic Algorithm: Representation, Fitness function, Population, Operators – Selection, Mutation, 
Crossover, Others, Multi-objective optimization problems (8 Lectures) 
Metaheuristic and Swarm Intelligence: Ant colony optimization, Bee colony optimization, Particle swarm 
optimization, Cuckoo search algorithm and others (6 Lectures) 
Rough Sets, Knowledge representations, Rough decision making and data mining techniques, Granular 
Computing (5 Lectures) 
Hybrid Systems: Neuro-fuzzy systems, Rough-neural computing, Fuzzy logic and Genetic Algorithm, GA 
based back propagation networks, Fuzzy associative memories, Hybrid systems using fuzzy and rough 
sets (9 Lectures) 
Big Data Challenges and Soft Computing Opportunity: Uncertainties in Big Data Inputs, Uncertainties in 
Big Data Decisions  (3 Lectures) 
  
Reference Books 
1. S.N. SIVANANDAM, S.N. DEEPA (2018), Principles of Soft Computing, Wiley India, 2018, 3rd Edition. 
2. F.O. KARRAY, C. De SILVA (2004), Soft Computing and Intelligent Systems Design: Theory, Tools and 

Applications, Pearson Education. 
3. Z. PAWLAK (1991), Rough Sets: Theoretical Aspects of Reasoning about Data, Springer Netherlands.  
  
Self Learning Material 
1. Computer Science and Engineering - NOC: Introduction to Soft Computing: 

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105173/ 
2. Soft Computing — IT60108: http://cse.iitkgp.ac.in/~dsamanta/courses/sca/index.html. 
3. Soft Computing: http://www.myreaders.info/html/soft_computing.html. 

 

 
 
  

45 
 



Course Title Randomized Algorithms Course No. CSL7xxx 

Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech CSE, AIDE Type Elective 
Prerequisite DAA, PSSP   

Objectives 
This course presents basic concepts in the design and analysis of randomized algorithms.   
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Familiarity with several of the main thrusts of work in randomized algorithms. 
2. Ability to read current research publications in the area 
3. Ability to design and analyze algorithms for solving real problems.  
 
Contents 
Tools and Techniques: Basic probability theory; randomized complexity classes; game-theoretic techniques; 
Markov, Chebyshev, and moment inequalities; limited independence; tail inequalities and the Chernoff 
bound; conditional expectation; the probabilistic method; Markov chains and random walks; algebraic 
techniques; probability amplification and derandomization. (22 Lectures)   
Applications: Sorting and searching; data structures; combinatorial optimization and graph algorithms; 
geometric algorithms and linear programming; approximation and counting problems; parallel and 
distributed algorithms; online algorithms.  (20 Lectures)  
 
Text Books 
R. MOTWANI, P. RAGHAVAN (1995), Randomized Algorithms, Cambridge University Press, 1st Edition.  
 
Reference Books 
1. M. MITZENMACHER, E. UPFAL (2017), Probability and Computing: Randomized Algorithms and 

Probabilistic Analysis, Cambridge University Press, 2nd Edition. 
2. W. FELLER (2008), An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications, Volumes I and II, John 

Wiley, 2nd Edition. 
3. P. BILLINGSLEY (2012), Probability and Measure, John Wiley. 
 
Self Learning 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-856j-randomized-
algorithms-fall-2002/lecture-notes/.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

46 
 



Title Video Processing Course No. CSLXXXX 
Department CSE, EE Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M.Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Linear Algebra   

  Objectives  
1. To make the students familiar with several issues and challenges involved in the task of video  

processing 
2. To enable students to formulate problems related to video processing and explore solutions 
 
Learning Outcomes  
     The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Address the challenging issues of video processing and to come with new solutions by their own 
2. Handle  multi-dimensional signals other than videos 

 
Contents  
Digital Images and Video:Human Visual Systems, Analog Video, Digital Video, 3D Video, Video Quality 
(2 Lectures)  
Multi Dimensional Signals and Systems: Multi-dimensional Signals, Multi-dimensional Systems, Multi-
dimensional transforms, Multi-dimensional Sampling Theory (7 Lectures)  
Motion Estimation: Camera Models, Motion Models, Motion Estimation, Differential Methods, Matching 
Methods, Non-linear Optimization Methods, 3-D Motion and Shape Estimation (10 Lectures) 
Video Segmentation and Tracking: Basics of Segmentation, Video based Segmentation Algorithms Change 
Detection, Motion Segmentation, Motion Tracking, Performance Evaluation (10 Lectures)  
Video Filtering:Spatio-temporal Filtering, Video Format Conversion, Multi-Frame Noise Filtering, Multi-
Frame Restoration (6 Lectures)  
Video Compression:  Motion JPEG 2000, MPEG-4, HEVC, SHVC, H.264  (3 Lectures) 
Modern Topics in Video Processing: Ego-centric Video Processing, 360-degree Video, Streaming Video (4 
Lectures) 

 
Textbooks  
1. A.M. TEKALP (2015), Digital Video Processing, Prentice Hall Signal Processing Series, 2nd Edition. 
2. A. BOVIK (2009), The Essential Guide to Video Processing, Academic Press, 2nd Edition. 
 
Reference Books  
1. E. MAGGIO, A. CAVALLARO (2011), Video Tracking: Theory and Practice, Wiley and Sons. 
2. M. WOHL (2017), The 360° Video Handbook. 
3. Research literature  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

47 
 



Title Digital Image Processing Course No. CSLXXX 
Department CSE, EE Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M.Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Linear Algebra   

Objectives  
1. To introduce the origin and formation of digital imaging.  
2. To develop the understanding of different types of imaging techniques for different purposes. 
3.  To equip the students with various possible applications of the image analysis.   

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Enhance image in spatial and frequency domain.      
2. Implement various aspects of image segmentation and compression.    

Contents 
Digital Image Fundamentals: Image modeling, Sampling and Quantization, Imaging Geometry, Digital 
Geometry, Image Acquisition Systems, Different types of digital images (3 Lectures)  
Image Transforms: Basic transforms: Spatial and Frequency Domain Transforms (8 Lectures)  
Image Enhancement: Point processing, interpolation, enhancement in spatial domain, enhancement in 
frequency domain (7 Lectures) 
Color Image Processings:Color Representation, Laws of color matching, chromaticity diagram, color 
enhancement, color image segmentation, color edge detection (3 Lectures)  
Image compression: Lossy and lossless compression schemes, prediction based compression schemes, 
vector quantization, sub-band encoding schemes, JPEG compression standard (4 Lectures)  
Morphology:Dilation, erosion, opening, closing, hit and miss transform, thinning, extension to grayscale 
morphology, Euler technique (5 Lectures)  
Segmentation: Segmentation of grey level images, Watershed algorithm for segmenting grey level image 
(6 Lectures) 
Feature Detection:Fourier descriptors, shape features, object matching/features (6 Lectures)  
 
Textbook  
1. C. GONZALEZ, R.E. WOODS (2018), Digital Image Processing, Prentice Hall, 4th Edition.   
2. A.K. JAIN (1989), Fundamentals of Digital Image Processing, Prentice Hall. 

 
Reference Books  

  Research literature  
 

Online Course Material  
  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117104020/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

48 
 



Course Title Speech Understanding Course No. CSLXxxx 

Department EE Structure (L-T-P-C) 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech CSE, AIDE Type Elective 
Prerequisite PR-ML   

Objectives 
1. To provide insights into fundamental concepts and algorithms related to speech processing and 

understanding 
2. Impart working expertise by introducing practical problems. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Building a speech recognition system 
2. Design and implement basic speech based application 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Speech processing:Digitization and Recording of speech signal, Review of Digital Signal 
Processing Concepts, Human Speech production, Acoustic Phonetics and Articulatory Phonetics, Different 
categories speech sounds and Location of sounds in the acoustic waveform and spectrograms. (14 Lectures) 
Speech recognition: Analysis and Synthesis of Pole-Zero Speech Models, Short-Time Fourier Transform, 
Analysis:- FT view and Filtering view, Synthesis:-Filter bank summation (FBS) Method and OLA Method, 
Features Extraction, Extraction of Fundamental frequency, Speech Enhancement, Clustering and Gaussian 
Mixture models, Speaker Recognition.(14 Lectures) 
Speech based applications:HMM and Neural models  for speech recognition, Speech generation, Question 
answering, Dialogue systems, Other Speech based Applications.(14 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. T.F. QUATIERI (2002), Discrete-Time Speech Signal Processing, Prentice-Hall, New Jersey. 
2. D. JURAFSKY, J.H. MARTIN, Speech and Language Processing: An Introduction to Natural Language 

Processing, Computational Linguistics and Speech Recognition (3rd Edition Draft), 2019. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Y. GOLDBERG (2016), A Primer on Neural Network Models for Natural Language Processing, Journal 

of Artificial Intelligence Research. 
2. I. GOODFELLOW, Y. BENGIO, A. COURVILLE (2016), Deep Learning, The MIT Press, 1st Edition. 
3. S.K. PATRA (2011), Digital Signal Processing: A Computer-Based Approach, McGraw-Hill, 4th Edition. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

49 
 



Title Statistical Inference and Simulation Techniques Number MAL4XXX 

Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech Type Elective 

Prerequisite None   

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide background in the area of Statistics. 
2.  Provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for further applications in 

their respective domains of interest. 
3.     Provide understanding of simulation techniques with applications 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Provide basic understanding of the Point and Interval Estimation, Testing of Hypotheses, Non-

parametric Estimation 
2. Impart knowledge in Random Sampling, Unbiased Estimation, Bias-Variance Tradeoff, and Goodness of 

Fit. 
3. Apply simulation techniques in their domain of interest. 

 
Contents  
Review of Probability and Statistics [3 Lectures]: Sampling Distributions (Chi-square, t, F, Normal) and random 
sampling 

Parametric Estimation [10 Lectures]: Unbiasedness and Consistency, Sufficiency and Completeness, Minimum 
Variance Unbiased Estimators, Method of Moments and Maximum Likelihood,  

Testing of Hypothesis [8 Lectures]: Interval Estimation, Neyman Pearson Theory for Testing of Hypotheses,  
Likelihood Ratio Test 

Non-parametric Estimation [5 Lectures]: Bayesian Approach of Estimation, Non-parameteric Estimation, Sequential 
Hypotheses Testing 

Random Variate Generation [5 Lectures]: Random numbers, properties of random numbers, random number 
generation, and random variate generation. 

Simulation Techniques [8 Lectures]: Simulating a Two Dimensional Poisson Process, Multivariate Distribution, 
Generating Variables from Copula Models 

Markov Chain, Monte Carlo Methods [3 Lectures] 

 
Textbooks  
1.   Rohatgi, V. K. (2003), Statistical Inference, Dover Publications Inc. 
2.   Hogg, R. V., McKean, J. W., Craig, A. T. (2009), Introduction to Mathematical Statistics, Pearson 
3.   Ross, S. M. (2013), Simulation, Academic Press, Elsevier. 
 
Reference Book  
1.    Casella, G. and Berger, R. L. (1990), Statistical Inference, Brooks/ Cole Publishing Company 
2.    Rao, C. R. (2006), Linear Statistical Inference and Its Applications, Wiley 
 
Online material: 
Zhou Fan, Introduction to Statistical Inference, Stanford University, 
http://web.stanford.edu/class/stats200/. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

50 
 



Title Introduction to Financial Engineering Number MA4XX 
Department Mathematics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type  
Prerequisite Probability, Statistics and Random Processes   

Objectives  
1. Technical Analysis of Financial Data 
2. Securities Pricing  
3. Risk Management  
4. Portfolio Optimization – Balancing risk and return 
5. Modeling – Pricing of derivatives 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Understand the Market 
2. Understanding Derivatives and Securities 
3. Pricing and Valuation in Discrete Case 
4. Using the Binomial Model for Option Pricing 
 
Contents  
Risk free Assets:Introduction to Financial Markets and Financial Instruments, Technical and 
Fundamental Analysis, Time Value of Money, Different Compounding Periods, Bonds, Bond Pricing. (6 
Lectures) 
Mean Variance Theory:Risky Assets, Risk and Return, Mean Variance Analysis, Markowitz Theory for 
Portfolio Optimization, Inclusion of Risk Free Asset, Capital Asset Pricing Model, Security Market Line. 
(8 Lectures) 
Derivative Securities: Spot and Forward Rates, Forward and Futures, Arbitrage Pricing Theory, Options 
(call and put), European and American Options, Put-call parity, Binomial Tree, Discrete Time Models for 
Option Pricing, Risk Neutral Probabilities, Option Greeks. (12 Lectures) 
Exotic Options and Greeks: Pricing of American Options, Path Dependent and Other Exotic Options, 
Option Greeks (Delta, Gamma, Vega, Sigma and Rho), Delta Hedging, Delta-Gamma Hedging. (6 
Lectures) 
Interest Rate Derivatives: Black Scholes Model, CRR Model, Interest Rate Models (Hull-White, Cox-
Ingersoll-Ross, Vasicek). (10 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks  
1. M. CAPINSKI, T. ZASTAWNIAK (2010). Mathematics for Finance: An Introduction to Financial 

Engineering, Springer. 
2. D.G. LUENBERGER (1998). Investment Science, Oxford University Press. 
 
Reference Book  

   J.C. HULL, S. BASU (2014), Options, Futures and Other Derivatives, Pearson. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

51 
 



Title Introduction to Game Theory Number MAL4XXX 
Department Maths L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   

Objectives  
1. To provide basic understanding of Game Theory and its applications. 
2. To equip the students with sufficient knowledge in Game theory which can be used by the students in 

their respective fields. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Understanding of basic of Non-cooperative games and Nash Equilibria  
2. Understanding of Dual Simplex method and concept of Duality with applications to game theory.   
3. Understanding of Nash Model with security point, stable strategies and Bayesian Games. 

 
Contents 
Game Trees, Choice Functions and Strategies, Choice Subtrees, Equilibrium N-tuples Strategies. (4 Lectures) 

Normal Forms, Non-cooperative games, Nash Equilibrium and its computation, The von Neumann Minimax 
Theorem, Mixed strategies, Best Response Strategies. (8 Lectures) 

Matrix Games and Linear Programming, Simplex Algorithm, Avoiding cycles and Achieving Feasibility, 
Dual-Simplex Algorithm, Duality Theorem. (10 Lectures) 

2x2 Bimatrix Games, Nonlinear Programming Methods for Non-zero Sum Two-Person Games, Coalitions 
and Characteristic Functions, Imputations and their Dominance. (4 Lectures) 

The Core of a game, Strategic Equivalence, Stable Sets of Imputations, Shapley Values, N-Person Non-Zero 
Sum Games with continuum of strategies – Duels, Auctions. (8 Lectures) 

Nash Model with Security Point, Threats, Evolution, Stable Strategies, Population Games, Bayesian Games. 
(8 Lectures) 

Textbook 
1. M. MASCHLER, E. SOLAN, S. ZAMIR (2013), Game Theory, Cambridge University Press.  
2. M.J. OSBORNE, A. RUBINSTEIN (1994), A Course in Game Theory, The MIT Press. 
 
Reference Book  

   P.D. STRAFFIN (Jr.) (1993), Game Theory and Strategy, The Mathematical Association of America.  
 
Online Course Material 

   M.O. JACKSON, K.L. BROWN, Y. SHOHAM, Game Theory, Coursera Course Material:      
https://www.coursera.org/learn/game-theory 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

52 
 



Title Reliability Engineering and Life Testing Number MAXXX 
Department Mathematics L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basic Probability & Statistics   

Objectives  
To understand the basic concepts of statistical reliability theory and their various real life applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the basic notion of systems, different reliability measures and different lifetime models 
2. Understand the basic concepts of life testing and inference 
3. Gain the ability to handle different issues in software reliability 

 
Contents  
Introduction:Importance of reliability, Definition of reliability and its measures, Concept of failure, Mean 
time to failure. (2 Lectures) 
System Reliability:Components and systems, Series, parallel, k-out-of-n system and their reliability block 
diagrams; Coherent system, path sets and cut sets; Structural importance of components; Reliability of 
coherent system with independent components; Reliability importance of components; Bounds on system 
reliability. (7 Lectures) 
Lifetime Models: Notion of aging, concept of hazard rate, reliability and mean residual life functions, IFR 
and DFR class of life distributions; Bath-tub failure curve; Lifetime distributions: exponential, Weibull, 
gamma, etc. (5 Lectures) 
Redundancy, Load Sharing and Stress-Strength Models: Systems with hot, cold and warm standby 
components; Reliability of shared load parallel system; Stress- strength models; Cumulative damage model, 
Virtual age model. (6 Lectures) 
Life Testing and Inference:Life testing, Complete data and censored data; Type-I, Type-II, hybrid and 
random censoring schemes, Parametric inference based on complete and censored data using asymptotic 
likelihood theory, Nonparametric estimate (Life table and Kaplan-Meier) of reliability; Graphical methods 
(PP, QQ and TTT plots) and standard statistical tests for model validation, Life test acceptance sampling 
plans in exponential case; Basic concept of accelerated life testing. (14 Lectures) 
Software Reliability:The basic concept and definition, Difference between hardware and software 
reliability, Jelinski-Moranda Model and some other relevant models, The problem of optimal release time, 
Software Reliability predictions using artificial neural networks, Some recent models. (8 Lectures) 

 
Textbooks  
1. H. PHAM (2003), Handbook of Reliability Engineering, Springer. 
2. J.V. DESHPANDE, S.G. PUROHIT (2005), Life Time Data: Statistical Models and Methods, World 

Scientific, Singapore. 
3. H. PHAM (2006), System Software Reliability, Springer-Verlag. 
 
Reference Books  
1. W.Q. MEEKER, L.A. ESCOBAR (1998), Statistical Methods for Reliability Data, John Wiley. 
2. J.F. LAWLESS (2003), Statistical Models and Methods for Lifetime Data, John Wiley. 
3. W. NELSON (1982), Applied Life Data Analysis, John Wiley. 
4. R.E. BARLOW, F. PROSCHAN (1983), Statistical Theory of Reliability and Life Testing Probability 

Models, Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 
5. R.E. BARLOW, F. PROSCHAN (1965), Mathematical Theory of Reliability, John Wiley. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

53 
 



Title Stochastic Calculus for Finance Number MA4XX 
Department Mathematics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type  
Prerequisite Probability, Statistics and Random Processes   

Objectives  
1. To develop an understanding of change of measure, Martingales and Brownian motion  
2. To develop an understanding of Ito’s calculus with Stock Market applications 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Understanding Derivatives and Securities 
2. Pricing and Valuation in Discrete Case 
3. Ito’s Integral and Ito Process 
4. Black Scholes Model 
5. Various Interest Rate Models 
 
Contents  
Discrete Time Models: General probability spaces, Gaussian and log-normal distribution, filtration, 
martingales and stopping times, Binomial model for option pricing, conditional expectation given a sigma 
field, Brownian motion and its properties. (8 Lectures) 
Continuous Time Models: Continuous approximation of Binomial model, Ito’s integral and martingales, 
properties of Ito’s integral, continuous time financial market models, Geometric Brownian motion, Black-
Scholes-Merton model, Black-Scholes PDE and formulas. (10 Lectures)  
Applications for Option Pricing: Risk-neutral valuation, option pricing, the Greeks, put-call parity, Risk-
neutral valuation, Girsanov's theorem for change of measure, martingale representation theorems, 
representation of Brownian martingales. (10 Lectures) 
Stochastic Differential Equation: Feynman-Kac formula and its applications, models with stochastic 
volatility, pricing and hedging in incomplete markets, bond markets, term-structures of interest rates, bond 
pricing, Short rate models, martingale models for short rate, Vasicek, Cox-Ingersoll-Ross and Hull-White 
models. (14 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks  
1. S.E. SHREVE (2004), Stochastic Calculus for Finance I: The Binomial Asset Pricing Model, Springer-

Verlag. 
2. S.E. SHREVE (2004), Stochastic Calculus for Finance II: Continuous-Time Model, Springer-verlag. 
 
Reference books 

   F.C. KLEBNER (2005), Introduction to stochastic Calculus with Applications, Imperial College Press. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

54 
 



Title Time Series Analysis Number MA4XX 
Department Mathematics L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type  
Prerequisite Probability, Statistics and Random Processes   

Objectives  
1. To provide working knowledge of time series and forecasting methods 
2. To provide with techniques and receipts for estimation and assessment of quality of economic models 

with time series data 
 
Learning Outcomes  

  To develop the skills needed to do empirical research in fields operating with time series data sets 
 
Contents  
Stationary Processes:Strong and weak, autocorrelation function, linear processes, estimation of mean and 
covariance functions, Wold decomposition Theorem. (8 Lectures) 
ARMA Models: ARMA (p, q) processes, ACF and PACF, Modeling using ARMA processes, estimation of 
parameters, testing model adequacy, Order estimation. (8 Lectures) 
Forecasting: Prediction in stationary processes, special reference to ARMA processes, Frequency domain 
analysis – spectral density and its estimation, transfer functions. (8 Lectures) 
Non-stationary Models: ARMAX, ARIMAX models and introduction to ARCH models. (10 Lectures) 
Multivariate Time Series: Multivariate Time Series, State Space Models. (8 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks 
1. P.J. BLOCKWELL, R.A. DAVIS (2017), Introduction to Time Series and Forecasting, Springer, 2nd 

Edition. 
2. C. CHATFIELD (2004), The Analysis of Time Series – An Introduction, Chapman and Hall / CRC, 4th 

Edition. 

Reference book 
  G.E.P. BOX, G. JENKINS, G. REINSEL (1994), Time Series Analysis-Forecasting and Control, Pearson, 3rd 

Edition. 
 
Online Learning  material 

  https:// ocw.mit.edu/courses/economics/14-384-time-series-analysis-fall-2013/recitations/. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

55 
 



Course Title Differential Geometry Course No. MAL4XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
1. To introduce the fundamental concepts of differential geometry, In particular, focusing on the local and 

global properties of curves and surfaces.  
2. To learn major topics will include geodesics, parallel transport, curvature, isometries, the Gauss map and 

the Gauss-Bonnet theorem. 

 

Learning Outcomes 

1. Understanding of concrete aspects of geometry, centered on the notion of curvatures. 
2. Understanding of major theorems (with proofs), Gauss-Bonnet and Poincare-Hopf Index theorems. 
 
Contents  
Introduction [Lectures 8]: Graphs and level sets of functions on Euclidean spaces, vector fields, integral 
curves of vector fields, tangent spaces. 
Theory of Surfaces [Lectures 12]: Surfaces in Euclidean spaces, vector fields on surfaces, orientation, Gauss 
map, Geodesics, parallel transport, Weingarten map. 
Intrinsic Geometry of Surfaces [Lectures 14]: Curvature of plane curves, arc length and line integrals, 
Curvature of surfaces. Parametrized surfaces, local equivalence of surfaces and Gauss-Bonnet Theorem. 
Applications [Lectures 8]: Manifold learning methods applied to data, Network curvature metrics (discrete 
Ricci curvature and flow), discrete exterior calculus for animation/computer vision, conformal mapping 
of image data (particularly medical images with Yamabe flow/Ricci flow), data representation in 
Teichmuller space (particularly video and image data), and machine learning on Riemannian manifolds.  

 
Textbooks 
1. M.P. de Carmo (2017), Differential Geometry of Curves and Surfaces, Dover Publications, 2nd Edition. 
2. M. Spivak (2005), A Comprehensive Introduction to Differential Geometry, Publish or Perish Inc., 3rd 

Edition.  
3. J.A. THORPE (1979), Elementary Topics in Differential Geometry, Springer. 
 
Reference Books 
1. J.J. STOKER (1988), Differential Geometry, Wiley.  
2. T.F. BANCHOFF, ST. LOVETT (2015), Differential Geometry of Curves and Surfaces, Chapman and 

Hall/CRC, 2nd Edition. 
3. A.N. PRESSLEY (2010), Elementary Differential Geometry, Springer, 2nd Edition. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

56 
 



Course Title Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos Course No. MAL4XX0 
Department Mathematics L-T-P-D [C] 3–0–0-0[3] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite    

Objectives 
1. To introduce the concept of linear and nonlinear dynamical systems. 
2. To learn the basic concepts in dynamical systems, like, evolution of system, fixed points, periodic 

points, attractors, bifurcation process and stability of the systems. 
3. To understand the nonlinearity in nature and nonlinear models which are present in other areas: 

Physics, Biology, Chemistry and Engineering. 
4. Use Matlab or Mathematics for solving dissipative dynamical systems, which are relevant for 

engineering models. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Construction of phase portraits of linear and nonlinear system and describe the stability of the system. 
2. Identification of attractors, like, fixed points, periodic attractors, Cantor set, Chaotic attractors. 
3. Understanding the different bifurcations, like, saddle node, transcritical and period doubling etc. 
4. Analyzing the dynamics of the system, when the parameter varies. 

 
Contents 
One-Dimensional Flows [Lectures 8]: Flows on the Line, Bifurcations, Flows on the Circles. 
Two-Dimensional Flows [Lectures 12]: Linear systems and stability, Phase space analysis, Vector field of 
nonlinear system and stability analysis, Limit Cycles, Saddle-node, Transcritical, Pitchfork bifurcations, 
and Hopf Bifurcations. 
Chaos [Lectures 15]: Lorenz equations, Chaos, Iterated maps, One-Dimensional Maps, period doubling 
bifurcation, Cantor set, Fractals and strange attractors. 
Applications [Lectures 7]: Mechanical vibrations, lasers, biological rhythms, superconducting circuits, 
insect outbreaks, chemical oscillators, genetic control, systems, chaotic waterwheels, and using chaos to 
send secret messages. 

 
Textbook 
Steaven, S., Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos: With Applications to Physics, Biology, Chemistry, and Engineering, 
1st Ed., Levant Books, 2007 
 
Reference Books 
1. Alligood K., Sauer, T., and Yorke, J., Chaos:  An Introduction to Dynamical Systems, Second Edition, 

Springer, 2008 
2. Stephen Wiggins, Introduction to Applied Nonlinear Dynamical Systems and Chaos, 2nd Edition, Spriger. 
 
Online course Material 
Banerjee S., IIT Kharagpur, NPTEL Course on “Chaos, Fractals and Dynamic 
Systems”,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105054/ 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

57 
 



Course Title Artificial Intelligence in Transportation Course No. CS6XX 

Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech, MTech, PhD Type Elective 
Pre-requisites Computer Networks   

Objectives 
1. The course is intended to provide students with an understanding of the applications of AI in 

transportation systems. 
2. The course would have a Computer Science flavor to transportation rather than Civil engineering 

perspective. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
At the end of this course, students would be able to appreciate the tremendous AI-driven impact on 
transportation systems worldwide.  
 
Contents 
Traffic flow basics (3 Lectures) 
Continuum models of traffic flow(4 Lectures) 
Traffic modeling and control of freeways (3 Lectures) 
Network-level traffic management (4 Lectures) 
Control of traffic signals (4 Lectures) 
ITS (Intelligent Transportation Systems) applications and case studies (4 Lectures) 
Sensor technologies and data requirements of ITS(3 Lectures) 
Overview of Autonomous Systems (4 Lectures) 
Driverless Vehicles (3 Lectures) 
Vehicular localization techniques (3 Lectures) 
Future trends in transportation systems (3 Lectures) 
Paper discussions (flipped mode) (4 Lectures) 
 
Note: 
Please note that the course material would not be taken from a single book or resource. It would be a 
combination of textbook material, research papers, and other sources. 
 
Textbooks: 
1. Alam, M., Ferreira, J., & Fonseca, J. (2016). Introduction to intelligent transportation systems. In 

Intelligent Transportation Systems (pp. 1-17). Springer, Cham. 
2. Lipson, H., &Kurman, M. (2016). Driverless: Intelligent Cars and the road ahead. MIT Press. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Chowdhury, M. A., &Sadek, A. W. (2003). Fundamentals of intelligent transportation systems 

planning. Artech House. 
2. Recent relevant RFCs, Internet drafts, selected research papers from relevant venues: Mobicom, 

MobiSys, SIGCOMM, Infocom, IEEE TMC, ACM MC2R. 
 
Self-learning Material: 
1. https://www.edx.org/course/intro-to-traffic-flow-modeling-and-intelligent-tra 
2. Relevant research papers. 

 
  

58 
 



Title Introduction to Industry 4.0 Course No.  AIDSLXXX 

Department AI & DS, ME Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech (AI & DS) Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite  Antirequisite OS, CN 

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an understanding of the fundamentals of operating systems and networking 
2. Explain the transformation of industrial processes through the integration of modern technologies 

such as sensors, communication, and computational processing 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
Apply technology  in industries to modify the various existing industrial systems 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Introduction: Sensing & actuation, Communication and Networking, Globalization and 
Emerging Issues, The Fourth Revolution, LEAN Production Systems, Smart and Connected Business 
Perspective, Smart Factories (7 Lectures) 
Industry 4.0: Cyber-Physical Systems and Next Generation Sensors, Collaborative Platform and 
Product 
Security: Cybersecurity in Industry 4.0, Basics of Industrial IoT: Industrial Processes, Industrial 
Sensing & Actuation, Industrial Internet Systems. 
Industrial IoT: Introduction, Industrial IoT, Business Model, Reference Architecture, IIoT-Business 
Models, IIoT Sensing, IIoT Processing, Security and Fog Computing: Cloud Computing in IIoT 
Data Analytics: Big Data Analytics and Software Defined Networks: IIoT Analytics - Introduction, 
Machine Learning, and Data Science, Data Management with Hadoop 
Case Study: Application in the areas: Factories and Assembly Line, Food Industry, Healthcare, Power 
Plants, Inventory Management & Quality Control, Plant Safety and Security (Including AR and VR 
safety applications), Facility Management, Oil, chemical and pharmaceutical industry, Applications of 
UAVs in Industries, Real case studies. 
 
Text Books 
A. Gilchrist (2016), Industry 4.0: The Industrial Internet of Things, APresss.  
 
Reference Books 
S.Jeschke, C. Brecher, H. Song, D. B. Rawat (2017), Industrial Internet of Things: Cyber 
Manufacturing Systems, Springer Series in Wireless Technology. 
 
Online Material 
NPTEL Lectures, Introduction to Industry 4.0: Industrial Internet of Things, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105195/ 

 
 
 
 
 

59 
 



Title Visual Computing Lab Number CSE/EE XXX 
Department CSE, EE, ME L-T-P [C] 0–0–4 [2] 
Offered for BTech. CSE, AIDE, EE, ME Type Specialization Core 
Prerequisite    

Objectives 
The Instructor will introduce students to the importance of human centered visual computing. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to design applications that explicitly consider human 
perception. 
 
Contents 
Sensing Devices: Concept of dynamic range, HDR displays, Event Based Camera, Time of Flight Camera, 
Coded Apertures, LIDAR, 3D Reconstruction, Kinect Scanner, Laser Scanner (4 weeks) 
Mini-project in Recognition (2 weeks) 
Mini-project in Navigation (2 weeks) 
Mini-project in Action (2 weeks) 
Mini-project in Mixed Reality (2 weeks) 
Mini-project in Trustable Decision (2 weeks) 
 
Textbooks 
Szeliski, R. (2010). Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications. Springer-Verlag New York Inc. Available 
Online. 
Reinhard, E., Heidrich, W., Debevec, P., Pattanaik, S., Ward, G., &Myszkowski, K. (2010). High Dynamic 
Range Imaging: Acquisition, Display, and Image-based Lighting. 2nd Edition. Morgan Kaufmann. 
 
Self Learning Material 
Prof.Ioannis (Yannis) Gkioulekas, Computational Photography, Carnegie Mellon 
University,http://graphics.cs.cmu.edu/courses/15-463/ 
Prof. Silvio Savarese, Computer Vision, From 3D Reconstruction to Recognition, Stanford 
University,http://web.stanford.edu/class/cs231a/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material: 
Prof. Gilbert Strang, Linear Algebra and Learning from Data, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology,https://math.mit.edu/~gs/learningfromdata/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  

60 
 



Title Bio-Imaging Number  
Department CS, AIDE, EE L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
The Instructor will provide an overview of different imaging modalities. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have ability to: 
1. The students will have the ability to choose appropriate imaging modality to visualize 

biological samples. 
2. The students will be able to interpret and analyse the images in a quantitative way. 

 
Contents 
Introduction to Bio-imaging [1 lecture], Light microscopy [1 Lectures], Basic configuration of modern light 
microscopes [3 Lectures], Fluorescence and fluorescence microscopy [3 Lectures], Super-resolution light 
microscopy [1 Lectures], 3D imaging techniques in microscopy: confocals and mesoscopic techniques [3]                                              
Total: 12 lectures              
 
Transmission Electron Microscopy - principles [6 Lectures], Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) [4 Lectures]                                                                                                                    
Total:  10 lectures 
 
Digital Imaging In Biology; Image acquisition devices: CCDs vs CMOS cameras; High-speed & time-lapse 
acquisition, Thermography, UV, Gamma & X-ray cameras                                                                                                                      
Total: 6 lectures 
 
Medical imaging: Principles, instrumentation and applications of  X-ray [3 Lectures], Computed Tomography 
[3 Lectures], PET and Ultrasonography [4 Lectures], MRI, and  fMRI [4 Lectures].                                                                                                                     
Total: 14 lectures 

 
Text Books 
1. Murphy (2001) Fundamentals of light microscopy and electronic imaging. John Willey & Sons. 
2. Pawley (2006) Handbook of Biological Confocal Microscopy. 3rd ed. Springer. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Bioimaging by Prof. Lu Lei at NTU Singapore: 
http://www.sbs.ntu.edu.sg/prospective/undergraduate/Curriculum%20and%20Course%20Descriptions/Pag
es/Major-PE/Table%20A/BS2010.aspx 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

61 
 



Title Medical Image Analysis Number  
Department CS, AIDE, EE L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamental knowledge  of Digital Image   

Processing or Computer Vision, Machine 
Learning/PRML, Deep Learning 

Objectives 
The Instructor will provide an in-depth understanding of classical and machine learning based 
techniques for medical image analysis. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have ability to: 
1. interpret and analyse the images in a quantitative way. 
2. apply the learned techniques for novel disease diagnosis and prognosis. 
 
Contents 
Classical Approaches: [1-0-0] 
Introduction to image processing and medical imaging modalities, denoising and enhancement [4 Lectures] 
Tissue and Cell Segmentation: clustering, active contours and level sets based approaches [5 Lectures] 
Medical Image alignment: rigid and deformable  registration [5 Lectures] 
 
Machine Learning and Deep Learning  Approaches:  (2-0-0) 
Fundus Image analysis, Retinal Vessel Segmentation [4 Lectures] 
MRI image analysis and segmentation, 3D brain reconstruction from and MRI slices and analysis [5 
Lectures] 
Microscopic image analysis and interpretation [5 Lectures] 
Ultrasonography image analysis  [4 Lectures] 
X-Ray and CT image segmentation, diagnosis and prognosis of  various diseases [5 Lectures] 
Correlation between different medical imaging modalities and conversions, augmenting clinical 
measurements with medical imaging modalities for diseases diagnosis and prognosis [5 Lectures] 
 
Text Books 
1. Prince, J. L., & Links, J. M. (2006). Medical imaging signals and systems. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson 

Prentice Hall. 
2. Suetens, P. (2017). Fundamentals of medical imaging. Cambridge university press. 
 
Self-Learning Material:  
Medical Image Processing by Prof. Jeff Orchard at  University of Waterloo: 
https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/~jorchard/cs473/CS473/Welcome.html 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

62 
 



Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2nd year B.Tech. Mechanical Engineering 
Curriculum Structure 

AY 2020-21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2nd year B.Tech. Mechanical Engineering 
Curriculum Structure 

AY 2020-21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



1. Introduction 

Reckoned as one of the most versatile engineering disciplines, Mechanical Engineering virtually touches every 
aspect of modern life, from mobile phones and biomedical devices, to aircrafts and power plants. It is concerned 
with technological advancements through the development of products, processes, and power, at scales ranging 
from nano-scale to large and complex systems. Mechanical Engineering principles and skills are involved at some 
stage during the conception, design, development, and manufacture of every human-made object. While design 
and manufacturing involves design of mechanisms and the analysis of materials, thermo-fluid systems include 
methods of energy conversions, heat transfer and fluid flow. Future innovations crucial to the country’s growth 
will always have their roots in the world of mass, motion, forces and energy- the world of mechanical engineers.  
At IIT Jodhpur, mechanical engineers are therefore trained, educated and positioned, in a way not only to adapt, 
but to define direct change. This is reflected in the portfolio of current activities of the department. Our faculty 
are involved in a wide range of projects in the areas of Energy conversion and power systems, heat transfer and 
fluid mechanics, mechanics of solid, mechanical vibrations, robotics, autonomous unmanned vehicles, design 
optimization, acoustics and noise control, control systems, rotor dynamics, micro-nano materials and 
applications, biomechanics, bio inspired thermofluids, fluid structure interaction etc. to name a few.  
Additionally, efforts are being made to introduce advance concepts like smart manufacturing, Industry 4.O, 
computational techniques, high-performance computing, applications of artificial intelligence, machine learning 
algorithms, sensors and IoT as a part of solving mechanical engineering problems. Keeping a balance between 
theory and hands-on-experience, the department intends to provide its students a solid foundation in core as 
well as emerging areas of mechanical engineering by inspiring critical thinking and nurturing problem solving 
skills. 
 
2. Objective of the program 

The key objectives of this program are: 
a. To enable students to have fundamental understanding of the core concepts of Mechanical Engineering  
b. To integrate analytical and computational ability with experimental skills to create individuals competent in 

professional engineering practices 
c. To stimulate critical thinking towards application of mechanical engineering concepts in interdisciplinary 

problem solving 
d. To expose students to advanced concepts like AI & ML, Industry 4.0 and IoT for product and system design 
e. To inculcate an attitude towards commitment to engineering ethics, leadership qualities and professional 

development. 
 
3. Expected Graduate Attribute 

Graduates of B.Tech program in Mechanical Engineering will have: 
1. Strong understanding of fundamentals of Thermofluids, Mechanical Design and Manufacturing (Processes 

and Systems) 
2. Ability to apply mechanical engineering principles to address challenges in real life problems through creative 

interdisciplinary thinking 
3. Ability to use different simulation and computational tools for a better understanding and designing of 

mechanical processes/systems 
4. Capability to appreciate the use of some of the advanced concepts like AI & ML, Robotics, Industry 4.0, IoT 

in Mechanical Engineering applications 
5. Awareness of grassroots problems of the society and ability to provide technological solutions of sustainable 

nature. 
6. Entrepreneurial spirit to undertake disruptive innovations  
7. Skills to communicate engineering concepts and ideas to peers in written or oral forms 
8. Commitment towards professional ethics and have humanitarian engineering skills.  

 
4. Learning Outcome 

Graduates of the B.Tech. program in Mechanical Engineering will: 
1. Gain a strong understanding of mathematics, science and engineering fundamentals of mechanical 

engineering 
2. Be able to design and conduct experiments as well as to analyze and interpret data 

1 
 



3. Be introduced to concepts including engineering design / optimization / sensors fabrication / computational 
methods / simulation tools /manufacturing systems and processes/ Industry 4.O/ thermal systems / fluid 
flow systems/ energy engineering/ micro-nano materials and applications/ AI/ IoT/ Smart Computing for 
various applications  

4. Have the ability to design a mechanical system, component or process tailored to meet desired needs under 
socio-economic and environmental constraints   

5. Be exposed to common problems that are prevalent in the domains of energy storage, systems and devices, 
clean energy, and micro-nano materials and applications, futuristic technology, and advanced scientific 
computation methods, allowing them to innovate and develop technological solutions for the same 

6. Receive effective, hands-on laboratory training as a part of laboratory courses and short-term research projects 
7. Develop their communication skills by participating in classroom presentations, seminars and workshops on 

manuscript / patent writing / presentation skills 
8. Be taught the value of team work and group discussion in problem solving, and time management to continue 

co-curricular activities without compromising for academics. 
 
5. New skillsets targeted 

Multi and interdisciplinary approaches: 
1. Design, develop and manufacturing of new or modified components for mechanical systems using computer-

aided design/modelling software/additive manufacturing 
2. Latest industrial pursuits, particularly in the areas of automation, robotics, and smart scientific computing, 

microfluidics etc. 
3. Development of smart manufacturing capabilities for relevant industries 
4. To play key roles in improving the range and performance of hybrid and electric automotive vehicles 
5. Design of power-producing machines in the fields of alternative energies 
6. Experimental validation of computational designs 
7. Selection of materials based on engineering applications to ensure that it is safe, reliable and efficient 
8. Advanced mechanical testing and characterization techniques 
9. Familiarity with advanced and futuristic scientific computing techniques 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 



6. Topic clouds and Mapping of Topic clouds with proposed courses 
 

 
 

Table 1. Topics and Mapping of Topic with Courses 

Area Topics Category (Core/ Course (PC/PE) 
Techniques 
Technology/Syst
ems) 

 Stress, Strain, Bending & Core Mechanics of Solid (PC) 
Design Torsion 
 

Hydraulic and Pneumatic Core and Control of Mechanical 
Systems, Mechatronic Techniques Systems (PC) 
systems 

Geometric & Functional Core and Design of Machine 
Requirements, Theory of Techniques Elements (PC) 
Failures, Design and 
Selection of Machine 
Elements 

3 
 



Mechanism Synthesis, Core and Kinematics & Dynamics 
Motion Analysis,  Force Techniques of Machines (PC) 
Analysis, Gear Trains, 
Cams, Dynamics of Multi-
Cylinder Engines 

Engineering Mechanics Core Engineering Mechanics 
(IE) 

Advanced concepts of stress Core Advanced Mechanics of 
analysis, analysis of systems Solids (PE) 
such as rotating disks, thick 
cylinders etc. 

Galerkin methods Finite Techniques Finite element Methods 
element methods and Applications (PE) 

Mechanical vibrations of Core Mechanical Vibrations  
one, two and multi degree (PE) 
of freedom systems, types of  
damping, vibration control  

Noise control of various Core and Techniques of Noise 
engineering applications Techniques Control (PE) 

Advanced Theories in Core Principles and Techniques 
Vibration of Vibration Control (PE) 

Theory of Helicopter Flight Techniques and Helicopter Dynamics (PE) 
Technology 

kinematics & kinetics of Core and Micro-Nano Mechanics 
microsystem deformations  Techniques (PE) 

Non-linear mechanical Core and Mechanics of Soft 
behaviours displayed by Techniques Materials (PE) 
soft materials and tissues 

Product life cycle, Product Core and Product Design and 
Design Techniques Feasibility 

Modal Analysis Techniques Experimental Modal 
Measurement Techniques Analysis (PE) 

Curves, Surfaces and Solid Core, systems Computer aided Design  
Modeling and Techniques (PE) 

Electro-Mechanical systems Systems and Mechatronics (PE) 
Technology 

Biomechanical systems Systems and Principles of 
Techniques Biomechanics (PE) 

Control system Systems and Control Systems (PE) 
Techniques 

Experimental Robotics Systems and Introduction to Robotics 
Techniques (PE) 

Dynamics of rotating Core and Rotor Dynamics 
machines Systems 

4 
 



Links, mechanisms and Systems Vehicle dynamics (PE) 
dynamics in vehicles 

Nonlinear phenomena and Core and Nonlinear Oscillations 
solutions, bifurcation and Techniques and Chaos (PE) 
stability, Chaos  

Theory of sound generation, Systems Introduction to Acoustics 
propagation and reception. (PE) 

Manufacturin Theory of Casting, Welding Core and Manufacturing Process 
g and Forming Techniques 

Principles in Production & Core and Production and 
Operations Management Techniques Operations Management 

(PC) 

Techniques in Machining Core and Machining Science and 
Science and Metrology Techniques Inspection Technology 

(PC) 

Principles of Smart Core and Smart Manufacturing 
Manufacturing Techniques (PC) 

Principles of Digital Core and Digital Fabrication (PC) 
fabrication Techniques 

Manufacturing Lab Core and Manufacturing Process 
Techniques and Systems Lab (PC) 

Machining Lab Core and Machining and 
Techniques Automated 

Manufacturing Lab (PC) 

Casting and Allied Core and Casting and Allied 
Processes Technology Technology Processes (PE) 

Welding Science and Core and Welding Science and 
Technology Technology Technology Technology (PE) 

Micro-Nano Manufacturing Core and Micro-Nano 
Technology Technology Manufacturing (PE) 

Design and Manufacturing Core and Design and 
of Bio Materials Technology Manufacturing of Bio 

Materials (PE) 

Principles of Computer Core and Computer Integrated 
Integrated Manufacturing Technology Manufacturing (PE) 

Non Traditional Machining Core and Non Traditional 
Process Technology Technology Machining Process (PE) 

Tool Design Techniques Core and Tool Design (PE) 
Technique 

Modeling and CAD in Technique and Geometric Modeling and 
Product Design Technology CAD 

Modeling and Control of Technique and Robotics (PE) 
Robot Manipulators Technology 

5 
 



CNC Technology in Technique and Computer-Aided 
manufacturing Technology Manufacturing (PE) 

Technologies for additive Technique and Additive Manufacturing 
rapid manufacturing Technology (PE) 

Micro systems and its Technique and MEMS & Microsystem 
manufacturing techniques Technology Technologies (PE) 

Modern methods of micro- Technique and Micro Forming 
forming technologies Technology Techniques (PE) 

Precision Micro/Nano Mechatronic Precision and Micro 
Manufacturing System Design Manufacturing(PE) 

Elements of Mechatronic Mechatronic Mechatronic System 
System Design System Design Design (PE) 

Applied Ergonomics Core and Applied Ergonomics (PE) 
Technology 

Design for Manufacturing Core and Design for Manufacturing  
Technology (PE) 

Welding metallurgy Core and Welding Metallurgy (PE) 
Technology Technology  

Forming Technology Core and Fundamentals of Metal 
Technology Forming Technology (PE) 

Thermofluids Fluid Statics, Kinetics, Core and Fluid Mechanics (PC) 
Inviscid and Viscous Flow, Techniques 
Turbulence and 
Compressible flows 

Conduction, Convection, Core and Heat Transfer (PC) 
Radiation, Boiling & Techniques 
Condensation  

Thermodynamics Core Thermodynamics (PC) 

Heat engines and Power Systems and Thermofluids Engineering 
Plant Cycles, Technique (PC) 
Turbomachines, 
Refrigeration and Air-
conditioning 

Turbines, pumps & Systems and Turbomachinery (PE) 
Compressors Technique 

Combustion engines Systems and Automotive 
Technique Propulsion(PE) 

Refrigeration cycles and air- Systems and Refrigeration and Air-
conditioning systems Technique conditioning(PE) 

Cycles in power plant and Systems and Power Plant 
energy conversion systems Technique Engineering(PE) 

Fluid dynamics in porous Core and Porous media flows and 
media Technique applications(PE) 

6 
 



Computational techniques Core and Computational Fluid 
for heat and fluid flow Technique Dynamics and Heat 

Transfer (PE) 

Solar Energy systems Technique and Solar Thermal Systems 
Technology (PE) 

Liquid transport in micro- Core and Micro-Nano Flows (PE) 
nano flows Techniques 

Exposer to various sensors Core and Micro Fluidics Lab (PE) 
and equipments used in Techniques 
micro system analysis 

Characterizing of sensors Technique and Nano Sensors (PE) 
based on nanomaterials Technology 

Non-Conventional energy Technique and Non-Conventional 
sources and Technologies Technology Sources of Energy and 

Emerging Technologies 
(PE) 

Fuel Combustions, Core and Combustion Technology 
Premixed Flames Techniques (PE) 

Fluid Flow Measurement Systems and Fluid Mechanics Lab (PE) 
Techniques 

Heat Transfer Systems and Heat Transfer Lab (PE) 
Measurements Techniques 

Measurements in various Systems and Thermofluids Lab (PE) 
Thermofluids equipment’s Techniques 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 



7. Course Categories, credit distribution and Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 
 
Table 2. ProposedCourse Categories and credit distribution in the proposed B.Tech. Programmes   

S. Course Type Course Category  Regular B.Tech. Double B.Tech.  
N.   

Credit  Total Credit  Total 

1 Institute Core (I) Engineering (IE) 34 69 34 59 
 

Science (IS) 16 16 

Humanities (IH) 12 9 

2 Programme Linked Science (LS) 7 0 
(L) 

3 Programme Core (P) Programme Compulsory (PC) 52  71 52 71 

Programme Electives (PE) 16 16 

B.Tech. Project (PP) 3 3 

4 Open (O) Open Electives (OE) 10 10 0 0 

5 Engineering Science  Engineering Science Core 0 0 22 22 
(E) 

Engineering Science Elective (EE) 0 0 8 8 

Total Graded 150  160 

6 Non-Graded (N) Humanities (NH) 6 15 6 15 

Engineering (NE) 3 3 

Design/Practical Experience (ND)  6 6 

Total Graded + Non-Graded   165  175 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 



8. Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 
 
Table 3. Credit Structure for B.Tech. Programmes 
 

Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact hours Total Credits  
(TC=TH/3) 

Contact Hours Beyond Contact Total Hours 
(CH) Hours (BCH) (TH) 

1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1 

1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 hr 2 hr 3hr 1  

1 hour of Lab/Project 0-0-1 1 hr 0.5 hr 1.5 hr 0.5 

#Contact hour for projects refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 



9. List of Programme Compulsory Courses 
 
Table 4. Distribution of courses under Thermofluids, Manufacturing and Design categories 

Sr. No Course Name LTP Contact Credit 
Hours 

1 Fluid Mechanics 3-1-0 4 4 

2 Fluid Mechanics-Lab 0-0-2 2 1 

3 Heat Transfer 3-0-0 3 3 

4 Heat Transfer-Lab 0-0-2 2 1 

5 Thermofluids Engineering 3-1-0 4 4 

6 Thermofluids Engineering Lab 0-0-2 2 1 

7 Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 4 

Total   18 

1 Mechanics of Solids 3-1-0 4 4 

2 Kinematics and Dynamics of Machines 3-0-2 5 4 

3 Design of Machine elements 3-0-2 5 4 

4 Engineering Visualization 0-0-2 2 1 

5 Engineering Mechanics 2-1-0 3 3 

6 Engineering Design I 0-0-2 2 1 

7 Engineering Design II 0-0-2 2 1 

Total   18 

1 Manufacturing Process 3-0-0 3 3 

2 Production & Operations Management 3-0-0 3 3 

3 Machining Science and Metrology 3-0-0 3 3 

4 Digital Fabrication 3-0-0 3 3 

5 Smart Manufacturing  2-0-2 3 3 

6 Manufacturing Processes and Systems lab 0-0-2 2 1 

7 Machining and Automated Manufacturing Lab 0-0-2 2 1 

8 Engineering Realization 0-0-2 2 1 

Total   18 

Total 53 

 

 

 

 

10 
 



Table 5.Programme Vertical Compulsory Courses  

Sr. No Course Name LTP Contact Hours Credi
t 

1 Fluid Mechanics 3-1-0 4 4 

2 Fluid Mechanics-Lab 0-0-2 2 1 

3 Heat Transfer 3-0-0 3 3 

4 Heat Transfer-Lab 0-0-2 2 1 

5 Thermofluids Engineering 3-1-0 4 4 

6 Thermofluids Engineering Lab 0-0-2 2 1 

7 Mechanics of Solids 3-1-0 4 4 

8 Kinematics and Dynamics of Machines 3-0-2 5 4 

9 Design of Machine elements 3-0-2 5 4 

10 Manufacturing Process 3-0-0 3 3 

11 Production & Operations Management 3-0-0 3 3 

12 Machining Science and Metrology 3-0-0 3 3 

13 Digital Fabrication 3-0-0 3 3 

Total 38 

 
Table 6. Programme Horizontal Compulsory Courses  

Sr. No Course Name LTP Contact Hours Credit 

1 Control of Mechanical Systems 3-0-4 7 5 

2 Data Structure and Algorithm (CS) 3-0-2 5 4 

3 Smart Manufacturing  2-0-2 3 3 

4 Manufacturing Processes and Systems lab 0-0-2 2 1 

5 Machining and Automated Manufacturing 0-0-2 2 1 
Lab 

Total 14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 



10. Area-wise Programme Elective Courses 
 

Table 7. Stream-wise Programme Electives Courses  

Area S.No Courses L-T-P Credit Course Level 

1 Introduction to Acoustics 3-0-0 3 400 

2 Mechanical Vibrations 3-0-0 3 400 

3 Computer Aided Design 3-0-2 4 400 

4 Principles of Biomechanics 3-0-0 3 400 

Design 5 Mechatronics 2-0-2 3 600 
 

6 Finite Element Methods and 3-0-0 3 600 
Applications 

7 Introduction to Robotics  3-0-0 3 400 
(offered by IDRP on RM) 

8 Embedded Systems (offered by 3-0-2 4 300 
electrical) 

      

1 Tool Design  3-0-0 3 400 

2 Applied Ergonomics  3-0-0 3 400 

3 Micro-Nano Manufacturing  3-0-0 3 400 

Manufacturing 4 Design and Manufacturing of Bio 3-0-0 3 600 
Materials  
 
 

5 Computer Integrated Manufacturing  3-0-0 3 600 

6 Design for Manufacturing  3-0-0 3 600 

      

1 Turbomachinery 3-0-0 3 400 

2 Refrigeration and Air-conditioning 3-0-0 3 400 

3 Solar Thermal Systems 3-0-0 3 600 

ThermoFluids 4 Porous media flows and applications 3-0-0 3 600 

5 Power Plant Engineering 3-0-0 3 700 
 

6 Computational Fluid Dynamics and 3-1-0 4 700 
Heat Transfer 

 
 
 

12 
 



11. Specialization to be offered by the department 
 
Table 8. Specializations List 

S. No. Name of Specializations Credit requirement 

Core Elective 

1 Micro-Nano Engineering            8 credits       12 credits 

2 Energy Engineering 8 credits 12 credits 

2 Design Engineering 8 credits 12 credits 

3 Smart Manufacturing 8 credits 12 credits 

 
Table 9. Specialization core and elective courses 

S. Name of Specialization Core             Specialization Electives   
No Specialization (8 credits) (12 credits) 

. 

1. Nanomaterials (MT)[3-0-0, Credit:3, Level: 400] 
2. Porous media flows & applications [3-0-0, Credit:3, Level: 

1.  Micro-Nano Flows 
600] 

[3-0-0,  Credit:3, 600 
3. Precision and Micro-Manufacturing [3-0-0, Credit:3, Level: 

Level] 
700] 

 
4. Nanosensors [3-0-0, Credit:3, Level: 700] 

2. MEMS and 
5. Microsystems Fabrication Technology (EE) [3-0-0, Credit:3, 

Micro-Nano Microsystems 
1 Level: 700] 

Engineering Technology [3-0-2, 
6. Micro-Forming Techniques [3-0-0, Credit:3, Level: 700] 

Credit:4, Level: 700] 
7. Micro-Nano Mechanics[2-0-0, Credit:2, Level: 600] 

 
8. Computational Fluid Dynamics and Heat Transfer [3-1-0, 

3. Microfluidics Lab [0-
Credit:4, 700 Level] 

0-2, Credit:1, 600 
9. Computational Materials Science (PH)[3-0-0, Credit:3, 

level] 
Level: 700] 

10. Project (3 Credits) 

1. Non-Conventional Sources of Energy and Emerging 
Technologies (ME) [3-0-0, Credit:3, Level: 700] 

2. Solar Energy and Applications  (ME) [3-0-2, Credit:4, Level: 
700] 

1.  Solar Thermal 3. Wind turbine and field design (Civil)[3-0-0, Credit:3, Level: 
Systems (ME) [3-0-0, 700] 
Credit:3, Level: 600] 4. Energy Harvesting (PHY)[3-0-0, Credit:3, Level: 700] 

 5. Biomass Energy Conversion(BIO) [3-0-0, Credit:3, Level: 
2. Power Plant 700] 

Engineering [3-0-0, 6. Hydropower (ME)[3-0-0, Credit:3, Level: 700] 
Energy 

2 Credit:3, Level: 700] 7. Building services and Intelligent building (Civil)[3-0-0, 
Engineering 

 Credit:3, Level: 700] 
3. Energy Storage 8. Smart Grid (EE) [3-0-2, Credit:4, Level: 700] 

Systems (ME fractals) 9.  Computational Fluid Dynamics and Heat Transfer  
[2-0-0, Credit:2, Level:       [3-1-0, Credit:4, 700 Level] 
700] 10. Renewable Energy Systems (EE) [3-0-0, Credit:3, Level: 

 700] 
11. Automotive Propulsion [3-0-2, Credit:4, Level: 700] 
12. Combustion Technology [3-0-0, Credit:3, Level: 700] 
13. Materials for Energy Conversion and Storage (MT)[ 3-0-

0, Credit:3, Level: 400] 

13 
 



14. Conduction and Radiation [3-0-0, Credit:3, Level: 700] 
15. Convective Heat and Mass Transfer [3-0-0, Credit:3, Level: 

700] 
16. Porous media flows & applications [3-0-0, Credit:3, Level: 

600] 
17. Project Credit:3 

 
1. Advanced Mechanics 

1. Mechanical Vibrations [3-0-0, Credit:3, 700 Level] 
of Solid [3-0-0, 

2. Introduction to Acoustics [3-0-0, Credit:3, 600 level] 
Credit:3, 700 Level] 

3. Geometric Modeling & CAD [2-0-2, Credit:3, 700 Level] 
 

4. Robotics [3-0-2, Credit:4, 700 Level] 
2. Finite Element 

5. Principles and Techniques of Vibration Control [3-0-0, 
Methods and its 

Credit:3, 600 level] 
Application [3-0-0, 

6. Techniques of Noise Control[3-0-0, Credit:3, 600 level] 
Credit:3, 600 Level] 

Design 7. Mechanics of Soft Materials[3-0-0, Credit:3, 600 level] 
2  

Engineering 8. Product Design & Feasibility[3-0-0, Credit:3, 600 level] 
3. Optimization [1-0-0, 

9. Nonlinear Oscillations and Chaos [3-0-0, Credit:3, 600 
Credit:1, 600 Level] 

Level] 
 

10. Experimental Modal Analysis  [3-0-2, Credit:4, 600 Level] 
4. Design Lab [0-0-2, 

11. Vehicle Dynamics  [3-0-0, Credit:3, 600 Level] 
Credit:1, 600 Level] 

12. Theory of vibrations  [3-0-0, Credit:3, 700 Level] 
 

13. Rotor Dynamics  [3-0-0, Credit:3, 700 Level] 
 

14. Helicopter Dynamics  [3-0-0, Credit:3, 700 Level] 
 

15. Project Credit:3 

1. Applied Ergonomics [3-0-0, Credit:3, 400 Level] 
2. Casting and Allied Processes   [3-0-0, Credit:3, 400 Level] 
3. Welding Science & Technology [3-0-2, Credit:4, 400 Level] 
4. Non Traditional Machining Process [3-0-0, Credit:3, 400 

Level] 
1. Artificial 

5. Design for Manufacturing [3-0-0, Credit:3, 600 Level] 
Intelligence-1: CS  

6. Geometric Modelling & CAD [2-0-2, Credit:3, 700 Level] 
[3-0-0, Credit:3] 

7. Robotics [3-0-2, Credit:4, 700 Level] 
 

8. Computer-Aided Manufacturing [3-0-2, Credit:4, 700 Level] 
2. Introduction to 

9. Additive Manufacturing [3-0-0, Credit:3, 700 Level] 
Cyber Physical 

10. MEMS & Microsystems Technology [3-0-2, Credit:4, 700  
Smart Systems: CPS [3-0-0, 

3 Level] 
Manufacturing credit:3] 

11. Precision and Micro Manufacturing [3-0-0, Credit:3, 700 
 

Level] 
 

12. Mechatronic Systems Design       [3-0-0, Credit:3, 700 
3. Statistics 2: Data & 

Level] 
Computational 

13. Computer Aided Inspection & Quality Control [3-0-0, 
Science [2-0-0, 

Credit:3, 700 Level] 
credit:2] 

14. Welding Metallurgy [3-0-0, Credit:3, 700 Level] 
15. Fundamentals of Metal Forming Technology[3-0-0, 

Credit:3, 600 Level] 
16. Micro-forming Techniques [3-0-0, Credit:3, Level: 700] 
17. Project Credit:3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 



11. Curriculum of B.Tech. Mechanical Engineering (Regular) 

Table 10. Curriculum of B.Tech. Mechanical Engineering  

Cat Course LTP CH NC GC Cat Course LTP CH N GC 
C 

I Semester II Semester                       

IE Engineering 2-1-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Mechanics Electrical Engineering 

IS Chemistry  3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Computer Science 

IS Physics  3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Bioengineering 

IS Chemistry Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1       

IS Physics Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1       

IS Mathematics I  3-1-0 4 - 4 IS Mathematics II 3-1-0 4 - 4 

IE Engineering 0-0-2 2 - 1 IE Engineering 0-0-2 1 - 1 
Visualization Realization 

NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - NE Engineering Design II  0-0-2 2 1 - 
Design I  

NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - NH Communication Skill 0-0-2 2 1 - 
Skill I  II  

NH Social Connect and 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Social Connect and 0-0-1 1 0. - 
responsibilities I responsibilities II 5 

NH Performing Arts I 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Performing Arts 0-0-1 1 0. - 
/Sports I  II/Sports II 5 

Total 11-2- 25 3 16 Total 12-1- 27 3 17 
12 14 

III Semester IV Semester 

LS Scientific 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Materials Science & 3 ×  3 - 3 
Computations Engineering 1-0-0   

F1:Material Selection 
F2: Structure of 
Materials 
F3: Physical 
Metallurgy 

IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4 Data Structure and 
PC 3-0-2 5  4 

Algorithm  

PC Mechanics of 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Signals and Systems 3-1-0 4 - 4 
solids 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 PC Fluid Mechanics 3-1-0 4 - 4 
Machine Learning 

PC Fluid Mechanics-Lab  0-0-2 2  1 

15 
 



LS Statistical 2-0-0 2 - 2 PC Manufacturing 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Mechanics  Process  

Optical 1-0-0 1  1 IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Measurement 
Techniques 

NE Intro. To 0-1-0  1        
Profession  

Total 15-3- 20 1 19 Total 18-2-4 24 - 22 
2 

V Semester VI Semester 

Production & 
 Design of Machine     

PC Operations 3-0-0 3 3 PC 
- elements 3-0-2 5  4 

Management 

Machining and 
Manufacturing 

Automated 
PC Processes and 0-0-2 2 - 1 PC 0-0-2 2  1 

Manufacturing Lab 
Systems lab (HC) 

(HC) 

Smart 
PC Heat Transfer 3-0-0 3  3 PC 2-0-2 4  3 

Manufacturing(HC) 

Kinematics and 
Thermofluids 

PC Dynamics of 3-0-2 5  4 PC 3-1-0 4  4 
Engineering 

Machines 

PC Control of 3-0-4 7  5 
Machining Science 

PC 3-0-0 3  3 Mechanical Systems –
and Metrology 

(HC) 

PE Programme Elective- 3-0-0 3  3 
PC Digital Fabrication  3-0-0 3  3 

1 

PC Heat Transfer Lab 0-0-2 2  1       

IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3       

Professional Ethics 0-1-0  1 - NH Professional Ethics II 0-1-0  1 - 
NH 

I 

Total 18-0- 24 1 21 Total 14-1- 25 1 20 
6 10 

VII Semester VIII Semester 

PP B. Tech. Project  0-0-6 6 - 3 IH Humanities IV 3-0-0 3 - 3 

PE Programme 6-0-0 6 - 6 PE Programme Electives 7-0-0 7 - 7 
Electives 

PC Thermofluids Lab 0-0-2 2  1 OE Open Elective-2 3-1-0 4  4 

OE Open Elective-1 3-0-0 3  3 OE Open Elective-3 3-0-0 3  3 

IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3       

16 
 



IS Environmental 2-0-0 2 - 2       
Science 

Total 14-0- 22 - 18 Total 16-1-0 17 - 17 
8 

Total of graded and Non-Graded Credit  9 150 

Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 

Grand Total  1 165 
5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 



13. Curriculum of Double B.Tech. : B.Tech. Mechanical Engineering  and Engineering Science 

Table 11. Programme structure of Double B.Tech. 

Cat Course LTP CH NC GC Cat Course LTP CH NC GC 

 I Semester   II Semester  

IE Engineering 2-1-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Mechanics Electrical 

Engineering 

IS Chemistry  3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Computer 
Science 

IS Physics  3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Bioengineering 

IS Chemistry Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1       

IS Physics Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1       

IS Mathematics I  3-1-0 4 - 4 IS Mathematics II 3-1-0 4 - 4 

IE Engineering 0-0-2 2 - 1 IE Engineering 0-0-2 1 - 1 
Visualization Realization 

NE Engineering Design 0-0-2 2 1 - NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - 
I  Design II  

NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - 
Skill I  Skill II  

NH Social Connect and 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Social Connect 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 
responsibilities I and 

responsibilities 
II 

NH Performing Arts I 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Performing Arts 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 
/Sports I  II/Sports II 

Total 11-2-12 25 3 16 Total 12-1-14 27 3 17 

 III Semester  IV Semester 

ES Probability and 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Materials 3 × 3 - 3 
Statistics Science & 1-0-0 

Engineering 
F1: Material 
Selection 
F2: Structure of 
Materials 
F3: Physical 
Metallurgy 

ES Modern Physics 3-0-0 3 - 3 ES Embedded 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Systems and IoT 

IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4 ES Data Structure 3-0-2 5 - 4 
and Algorithm 

18 
 



IE Signals and Systems 3-1-0 4 - 4 ES Design of 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Experiments  

IE Machine Learning 3-0-2 5 - 4 ES Modelling and 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Simulation 

NE Intro. To Profession  0-0-2  2  IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3 - 3 

Total 15-3-2 20 2 19 Total 18-0-6 24 - 21 

 V Semester  VI Semester 

Manufacturing Design of 
    

PC Processes and 0-0-2 2 - 1 PC Machine 
3-0-2 5  4 

Systems lab (H) elements 

PC Fluid 0-0-2  1 
PC Heat Transfer 3-0-0 3  3 Mechanics- 2 

Lab  

Machining 
Kinematics and and 

PC Dynamics of 3-0-2 5  4 PC Automated 0-0-2 2  1 
Machines  Manufacturin

g Lab (HC) 

Smart 
Machining Science 

PC 3-0-0 3  3 PC Manufacturin 2-0-2 4  3 
and Metrology  

g(HC) 

3-1-0 4 - 4 PC Thermofluids 
PC Mechanics of solids 3-1-0 4  4 

Engineering 

Control of 
PC Fluid Mechanics 3-1-0 4 - 4 PE/Es Mechanical 3-0-4 7  5 

Systems 

PC Manufacturin 3-0-0 3 - 3 
PC Heat Transfer Lab 0-0-2 2  1 

g Process 

3-0-0 3 - 3 PE Programme 3-0-0  3 
IH Humanities II 3 

Electives-2 

0-1-0 1 1 - NH Professional 0-1-0 1 - 
NH Professional Ethics I Ethics II 1 

 

Total 18-2-6 26 1 23 Total 17-2-10 30 1 24 

 VII Semester  VIII Semester 

PP B. Tech. Project  - PE/ Programme/Eng 15-0-0 15 - 15 
0-0-6 6 3 ES ineering Science 

Electives 

PC Production & IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3 
 

Operations 3-0-0 3 3 
- 

Management 

PC Digital Fabrication  3-0-0 3  3  PC     

19 
 



ES Scientific        
3-0-2 5 4 

Computation 

PC Thermofluids Lab 0-0-2 2  1       

PE/ Programme/Engine -       
OE ering Science 6-0-0 6 6 

Electives 

IS Environmental -       
2-0-0 2 2 

Science 

Total 17-0-10 27 - 22 Total 18-0-0 18 - 18 

Total of graded and Non-Graded Credit  9 160 

Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 

Grand Total  15 170 

Note: 1. ES are proposed Engineering Science compulsory courses,  
* Students will be required to take 4 extra credits under Engineering Science Elective in lieu of double counting 
of Embedded System and IOT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 



14. Detailed Course Content of Programme Compulsory Courses 

Title Fluid Mechanics Number  MEL2XX0/ CHL2XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering/  Chemical L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 
Engineering 

Offered for B.Tech (ME, CH) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 

Prerequisite    

 
Objectives 
The instructor will 
1. To inculcate the fundamental laws governing fluid flow 
2. Help the students to understand the importance and application of fluid mechanics. 
3. To exemplify concepts of similarity and model testing 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply fundamental knowledge in modelling and analysis of fluid flow problems in engineering 
2. Interpret data from experiments of fluid flows and solve using differential equations and charts 

 
Contents 
Introduction [2 Lecture]: Definition and properties, continuum approach, types of fluids, basics of vector 
calculus and index notations. 
Fluid statics [4 Lectures]: Basic equations, Manometry, hydrostatic force on submerged bodies, rigid body 
motion. 
Integral analysis of fluid flow [4 Lectures]:  Reynolds transport theorem, conservation equations. 
Differential analysis [5 Lectures]: Kinematics of fluids - Deformations in fluid particle, strain rate, vorticity, 
stream function, potential function, streamlines, pathlines, streaklines, derivation of Navier-Stokes equations. 
Incompressible Inviscid flow [6 Lectures]: Euler’s equation, Bernoulli’s equation, elementary potential flows, 
superposition of elementary flows. Vorticity and vortex flows 
Internal Incompressible Viscous flow [4 Lectures]: Hagen-Poiseuille and Couette flows, skin friction and loss 
coefficients, venturimeter, orifice meter and Pitot tube. 
External Incompressible Viscous flow [5 Lecture]: Boundary layer over flat plate, boundary layer thickness, 
Prandtl-boundary layer equations, momentum integral equation, adverse pressure gradient & separation, drag 
coefficients. 
Dimensional analysis and similarity [2 Lectures]: Buckingham Pi theorem and examples. 
Introduction to Turbulent flows [3 Lectures]: Decomposition of instantaneous velocities, time-averaged continuity 
and Navier-Stokes equations, Reynolds stresses, turbulent viscosity. 
Basics of Compressible flow [3 Lectures]: Acoustic waves, isentropic equations, concept of shock waves 
Few Industrial Applications [4 Lectures]: Pipe networks, Flow past immersed objects, Agitation and Mixing.  
 
 Text Book 
1. Fox, R. W., Pitchard, P. J and McDonald, A. T., (2010), Introduction to Fluid Mechanics, 7thEdition, John 

Wiley & Sons Inc. 

2. Munson, B. R., Rothmayer, A. P., Okiishi, T’H., and Huebsch, W. W. (2009),Fundamentals of Fluid 
Mechanics, 7th Edition, John Wiley and Sons 

3. Kundu, P. K, Cohen, I. M and Dowling, D. R, (2014), Fluid Mechanics, 6th Edn., Associated Press.  

4. McCabe, W.L., Smith, J.C., Harriott, P., (2005), Unit Operations of Chemical Engineering, 7th edition, 
McGraw-Hill International edition.  

 

21 
 



Reference Books 
1. White, F. M.,(2003), Fluid Mechanics, 5thEdition,  McGraw-Hil 

2. Cimbala, J.M. and Cengel, Y.A., (2010),Fluid Mechanics: Fundamentals and Applications, McGraw-Hill  

3. Bird. R. B., Stewart, W. E. and Lightfoot, E. N., 2006, Transport Phenomena, 2nd edition, John Wiley & Sons. 

4. Panton, Ronald L - Incompressible flow, John Wiley & Sons, 2006. Third edition is available from Wiley 
Student Edition 

 

Self-Learning Material  
1. S. Chakrabarty, Introduction to Fluid Mechnics,  NPTEL Course Material, Mechanical Engineering, IIT 

Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/105/112105269/ 
2. V.Shankar, Fluid Mechanics,  NPTEL Course Material, Chemical Engineering, IIT Kanpur,  

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/104/103104044/# 
3. Nishith Verma, Fluid Mechanics,  NPTEL Course Material, Chemical Engineering, IIT Kanpur,  

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/104/103104043/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 



Title Heat Transfer Number  MEL3XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 

Prerequisite Basics of Thermodynamics & Fluid   
Mechanics 

Objectives 
1. To inculcate understanding, formulation, designing and solving problems with concepts in conduction, 

convection and radiation 
2. To explain design concepts of fins, heat exchangers 
3. To introduce physical background associated with empirical correlations for heat transfer coefficients 

using real world problems 

Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Analyze empirical situation of steady and transient conduction heat transfer 
2. Evaluate transfer coefficients in natural  and  forced  convection  in  and  out  of  control areas 
3. Assess performance of various heat exchangers 
4. Solve numerical problems related to conduction and radiation heat transfer 
 
Contents 
Introduction (1 Lectures): Modes of heat transfer, Fourier’s law, conductivity, diffusivity 
Introduction to Heat conduction (3 Lectures): General  heat  conduction  equations,  1D Heat conduction, Boundary and 

initial conditions, Heat generation 
Steady   heat   conduction (4 Lectures): Heat   conduction   in   plane   wall,  cylinder,   sphere,   network analysis, critical 

radius of insulation, heat transfer from fins  
Transient heat conduction (4 Lectures): Lumped  system  analysis,  transient  heat  conduction  in  large plane walls, long 

cylinders and sphere with spatial effect, Heisler and Grober charts  
Introduction   to   convection (4 Lectures): Velocity   and   thermal   boundary   layer,  laminar,  turbulent  flows,  solution  

of  boundary  layer  equations,  Non-dimensional numbers  
External heat transfer (3 Lectures): Drag and heat transfer, parallel flow over flat plates, flow across cylinders and spheres  
Internal heat transfer (4 Lectures): Mean Velocity and Temperature, Critical Reynolds number, The entrance regions, 

Hydrodynamic and thermal entry lengths, fully developed flow 
Natural/free convection (3 Lectures): Physical Mechanism, Natural convection over surfaces, Criteria for forced and 

natural convection 
Boiling and condensation (3 Lectures): Boiling Curve, Nucleate boiling, film boiling, Dropwise and film condensation, 

Nusselt’s theory of film condensation  
Heat Exchangers (4 Lectures): Classifications, Overall Heat Transfer Coefficient, LMTD, Effectiveness-NTU method, 

Operation Issues, Introduction to Design of Heat Exchanger   
Introduction to radiation (5 Lectures): Physical Mechanism, Radiations laws, Intensity of Radiation, gray body 
View factors (4 Lectures): View Factor Integral for diffuse surfaces, Radiation exchange, Electric Circuit Analogy 
 
Text Book 
1. Incropera,  F.  P.  &  Dewitt,  D.  P.,(2011),Fundamental  of  Heat  and  Mass  Transfer, John Wiley & Sons 
2. Cengel, Y. A. & Ghajar, A. J.,(2008),Heat and Mass Transfer, McGraw Hill 
3. Sukhatme S.P., (2005), A Text Book on Heat Transfer, Universities Press 
 
Reference Books 
1. Holman J.P., Heat Transfer, Tata McGraw-Hill Edition, New Delhi 
2. Bejan A., Heat Transfer, Fourth Edition, John Wiley and Sons 
 
Self-Learning Material  
    1. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qa-PQOjS3zA&list=PL5F4F46C1983C6785 

 
 
 
 

23 
 



Title Thermofluids Engineering Number ME4XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–1–0 [4] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Programme Compulsory (PC) 

Prerequisite Basics of Thermodynamics and   
Fluid Mechanics 

Objectives  
1. Introduce various energy conversion devices using fluid and thermal energy 
2. To analyses the performance of various energy conversion cycles and devices 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Fundamental understanding on the thermodynamics cycles used in various energy conversion systems 
2. Performance analysis of various machines used in power plants, automobiles and refrigeration systems 

Contents 
Introduction [2 Lectures]: Basics of Fluid Mechanics and Thermodynamics Laws 
Fuels and Combustion [3 Lectures]: Introduction to combustion, Reacting systems, Stoichiometry and exhaust gas 
composition, Heat of formation, Adiabatic Flame Temperature 
IC Engines [5 Lectures]:  Introduction to SI and CI engines, Air standard cycle analysis, 2-S and 4-S engines, SI 
& CI engine combustion, Performance and testing of SI and CI engines. 
Emissions [2 Lectures]: IC engine emissions, after treatment systems, Low carbon propulsion techniques ; Steam 
Power Plants [5 Lectures]: Steam power plant cycle, reheating, regeneration, co-generation, Layout of a thermal 
power plant, classification of steam generators.  
Gas Turbine Power Plants [5 Lectures]: Layout of gas turbine power plant, Brayton Cycle, with reheat, 
intercooling, regeneration. 
Refrigeration Systems and Cycles [6 Lectures]: Performance parameters, Bell Coleman refrigeration cycle, Vapour 
compression refrigeration, Vapour absorption system.  
Psychrometry and its applications [4 Lectures] 
Turbines [4 Lectures]: Euler’s equation, velocity triangle, similarity laws & specific speed, Hydraulic Turbines: 
Impulse and reaction machines, Pelton-Turbine, Francis Turbine, Kaplan Turbine. 
Pumps [2 Lectures]: Centrifugal pump, Performance analysis, Pump Characteristics 
Compressors and Gas Turbines [4 Lectures]: Centrifugal Compressors, Stalling and Surging, Axial flow 
compressors, stage velocity triangles, Axial Gas Turbines. 

Textbook 
1. Heywood, J. B. (2004), Internal Combustion Engine Fundamentals, MIT Press. 
2. El-Wakil, M.M, (1985), Power Plant Technology – Mc -Graw Hill. 
3. Stocker, W. F and Jones J. W, (1983), Refrigeration & Air Conditioning, McGraw-Hill 
4. Dixon, S.L. (2005), Fluid Mechanics & Thermodynamics of Turbomachinery, 5th edition, Elsevier. 

Reference Books 
Cimbala, J. M. and  Cengel, Y. A,  (2010), Fluid Mechanics: Fundamentals and Applications, McGraw-Hill 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

24 
 



Title Heat Transfer Lab Number  MEP3XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2[1] 

Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 

Prerequisite Heat Transfer   

Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Provide the practical knowledge with regard to the determination of rate of heat exchange in various modes 

of heat transfer 
2. Provide practical exposure to various temperature measurement instruments and its working principle 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. The students will have the ability to: 
2. Compare the performance of different convection processes  
3. Measure the heat transfer properties of various metals 
4. Understand basic laws of radiation heat transfer  
5. Measure the temperature of objects using different temperature measurement instruments 
 
Contents (13-14 Classes) 
1. Study on Temperature distribution during 1-D heat transfer in (a) Plain Wall (b) Cylinder.  
2. Measurement of Thermal Conductivity of unknown material.  
3. Effect of Size of Plain wall on Temperature distribution and contact resistance.  
4. Demonstration of domestic solar water heating system (Time vs Temperature plots).  
5. Investigation of the influence of solar luminous intensity, the water flow rate and the angle of incidence of 

the light on the efficiency and temperature difference.  
6. Study on forced and free convection heat transfer for flow over flat plate, Tube bundle and Fins.  
7. Testing the accuracy and time response of different temperature sensors (PT100, NTC, Thermocouple, 

Mercury Thermometer, Gas Pressure Thermometer, Bimetallic Thermometer).  
8. Calibration of PT100 temperature sensor and derive equation of temperature as function of resistance.  
9. Calibration of K-Type thermocouple temperature sensor and derive equation of temperature as function 

of voltage.  
10. Study on validation of different radiation laws (a) Lambert’s Distance Law (b) Lambert’s Direction Law 

(Cosine Law) (C) Stefan Boltzmann’s Law. 
11. Study on Heat Exchangers (a) Parallel Flow and (b) Counter Flow 
12. Lab Course Project 
 
Reference Books 
1. Incropera,  F.  P.  &  Dewitt,  D.  P.,(2011),Fundamental  of  Heat  and  Mass  Transfer, John Wiley & Sons 
2. Cengel, Y. A. & Ghajar, A. J.,(2008),Heat and Mass Transfer, McGraw Hill 
3. Sukhatme S.P., (2005), A Text Book on Heat Transfer, Universities Press 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 



Title Fluid Mechanics Lab Number  MEP3XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2[1] 

Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 

Prerequisite Fluid Mechanics   

Objectives 
1. To introduce various forms of flow measuring devices and techniques 
2. To provide hands on experience on in the area of experimental fluid mechanics 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have: 
1. Ability to design experimental methods for fluid flow problems 
2. Ability to interpret data from experiments of fluid flows and usage of charts and hand books 
 
Contents (13-14 Classes) 
1. Determination of head loss in pipes having different diameters, different materials and different 

roughness  
2. Determination of pressure drop at different types of bends and valves  
3. Reynolds apparatus to measure critical Reynolds number for pipe flows  
4. Measurement of Cp distribution on a cylinder 
5. Wake survey experiments in a flow over a cylinder 
6. Impact of jet on flat and curved plates 
7. Wind tunnel calibration using Pitot static tube 
8. Working principle of different flow meters (orifice plate, venture meter, turbine, Rota meter, 

electromagnetic flow meter) 
9. Effect of change in cross section and application of the Bernoulli equation 
10. Flow measurement around an object or blockage using PIV techniques 
11. Class projects for designing and measurement of simple fluid mechanics experiments  
 
Reference Books 
1.  Fox,  R.  W.,  Pitchard,P.  J.,and McDonald,  A.  T., (2010), Introduction to Fluid Mechanics, 7thEdition, John 

Wiley & Sons Inc. 
2. Cimbala, J.M.,  Cengel, Y. A. (2010),Fluid Mechanics: Fundamentals and Applications, McGraw-Hill  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

26 
 



Title Thermofluids Lab Number  MEP4XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2[1] 

Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 

Prerequisite Fluid Mechanics   

Objectives 
1. To provide hands on training on the operation of  the different energy conversion devices 
2. To enable practical visualization of complex energy conversion processes 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have: 
1. Ability to interpret data from experiments on energy conversion and usage of charts and hand books 
2. To enable novel designs for new generation ThermoFluids technologies of hybrid and non-hybrid 

character 
 
Contents (13-14 Classes) 
1. Performance characteristics of Pelton turbine  
2. Performance characteristics of Francis turbine  
3. Performance characteristics of Centrifugal pump  
4. Performance analysis of Pumps in series and parallel  
5. Vapor absorption refrigeration  
6. Vapor compression refrigeration  
7. Ventilation experimentation facility and analysis  
8. Compresses air vortex tube  
9. Steam jet refrigeration Engine performance, Morse test 
10. Emission measurements  
11. Investigation of flames and spray structure 
 
Reference Books 
1. Heywood, J.B. (1988). Internal Combustion Engine Fundamentals. 
2. Ei-Wakil,M.M, (1985),Power Plant Technology, Tata McGraw-Hill 
3. Jordan, R. C. & Priester, G. B., (2003), Refrigeration & Air conditioning, Prentice Hall of India 
4. Sheperd, D. G., (1983),Principles of Turbomachinery, Mac Millan 

  

27 
 



Title Mechanics of Solids Number ME2XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–1–0–0 [4] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Programme Compulsory (PC) 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  
1. To inculcate fundamental concepts of stress, strain and deformation of solids 
2. Fundamental of applying equilibrium, compatibility and forced deformation relationships to structural 

elements 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Apply the fundamentals to analyze structural members 
2. Physical insight into distribution of stresses and strains in structural members 
3. Ability to design structural members using dimensions, force-displacement relationships, boundary 

conditions, loading and allowable stress 
 

Contents 
Stress and strain [10 Lectures]: Concept of stress at a point, Plane stress case: transformation of stresses at a point, 
principal stresses and Mohr's circle, Displacement field, Concept of strain at a point, Plane strain case: 
transformation of strain at a point, principal strains and Mohr's circle, Strain Rosette, Polar coordinates in stress 
and strain analysis. St. Venant’s principles and stress concentrations  
Mechanical behaviour [8 Lectures]: Concepts of elasticity, plasticity, strain hardening, failure (fracture/yielding), 
Generalized Hooke's law (without and with thermal strains) for isotropic materials, orthotropic and 
anisotropic materials, Force displacement relationship and geometric compatibility for axially loaded members 
and thin walled pressure vessels 
Static Analysis[5 Lectures]: Complete equations of elasticity; Force analysis (axial force, shear force, bending 
moment, and twisting moment diagrams) of slender members 
Elastic Bending[5 Lectures]: Moment curvature relationship for pure bending of beams with symmetric cross 
section, bending stress, shear stress; Cases of combined stresses, Deflection due to bending, Integration of the 
moment curvature relationship for simple boundary conditions, Stress concentrations   
Elastic torsion[5 Lectures]: Torsion of circular shafts and thin walled tubes, Stress concentrations  
Strain Energy[5 Lectures]: Concept of strain energy, strain energy for simple structural elements, Castigliano's 
theorems for deflection analysis and indeterminate problems;  
Elastic Buckling [4 Lectures]: Concept of elastic instability, Introduction to column buckling, Euler's formula  
 
Text books 
1. Crandall, S.H., Dahl, N.C., and Lardner, T. J., (1978), An Introduction to the Mechanics of Solids, McGraw Hill, 

Second Ed. with SI Units. 
2. Beer, F.P, Johnston, E.R. and De Wolf, J.T., (2004), Mechanics of Materials, Tata McGrawHill.  
3. Popov, E.P., (1990),Engineering Mechanics of Solids, First Ed. Prentice Hall 
4. Meriam, J.L. and Kraige, L.G., (1980), Engineering Mechanics, Vol. 1: Statics, 2nd Ed. John Wiley 
5. Timoshenko, S.P. and Goodier, J.N. ``Theory of Elasticity``, McGraw-Hill, International Edition, 1970. 
 
Self Learning Materials: 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/106/105106116/ 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/102/105102090/ 
3. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/104/105104160/ 

 
 
 
 
 

28 
 



Title Kinematics and Dynamics of Machines Number  MEL3XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 

Prerequisite Engineering Mechanics   

Objectives 
1. To cover the kinematics and dynamics of planar single degree freedom mechanisms 
2. To develop skills for designing and analyzing linkages,  cams,  gears and other mechanisms 
3. To teach students concepts of Newtonian dynamic analysis of mechanisms and machines 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. To analyze position,  velocity and acceleration kinematics  of mechanisms 
2. Evaluation of forces and torques in mechanism and machines in operation 
3. To understand the implication of computed results to improve design of machines 

 
Contents 
Part I: Kinematics [21 Lectures] 
Kinematics and Mechanism [2 Lectures]: Links, Kinematic pairs, Kinematics diagram and inversion, mobility, 
range of movements, Equivalent linkage 
Motion characteristics of Mechanism [5 Lectures]: Displacement analysis of planar mechanisms analytical 
methods, Plane motion of a rigid body, Velocity analysis: analytical and Instantaneous Centre of Velocity 
methods,  Coriolis component of acceleration, Acceleration analysis 
Mechanism Synthesis [4 Lectures]:  Function, Path, and Motion Generation, Three Position Dimensional Synthesis 
Cam follower mechanism [5 Lectures]: Classification of Cam and followers, nomenclature, description and 
analysis of follower motion, pressure angle, Determine of basic dimensions and synthesis of cam profiles 
Gear and gear train [5 Lectures]:  Spur gears and gear terminology, Fundamental law of gearing,  Involute 
profile, Interference and undercutting, Minimum number of teeth, Contact ratio, Helical gears on parallel 
shafts, Bevel helical, Spiral and Worm gears.  Simple, compound, epicyclic gear trains, planetary gear trains.  
 
Part I: Dynamics [21 Lectures] 
Introduction to Dynamics [2 Lectures]: Dynamics lumped-parameter models of mechanical systems, Newton’s 
Law,  Inertia and D Alembert Principle, Energy Method 
Dynamics of Rigid bodies [6 Lectures]: Solution Methods: superposition and simultaneous equation solution, 
Newtonian Approach, Shaking force and Shaking Moments, Applications to  Linkage and Single and Multi-
cylinder engines, Controlling Input Torque - Flywheel Design 
Balancing [5 Lectures]: Static unbalance, static balancing machines,  dynamics balancing,  applications to 
balancing of linkage, single and multi-cylinder engines 
Vibration Analysis [4]: Introduction, Basic features of vibratory systems, single degree freedom systems 
Dynamics of Cams [3 Lectures]: Rigid and elastic body cam system, analysis of eccentric cams, analysis of elastic 
cam systems, lumped models of cams and vibration analysis. 
Gyroscope [1 Lecture]: Gyroscopic Torque 
 
Laboratory Classes (12 Classes) 
Experimental: Coriolis Acceleration, Gear Trains, Static and Dynamic Balancing, Vibration Analysis, 
Gyroscope, Cam Dynamics 
Matlab-based: Analytical Position, Velocity and Acceleration Analyses, Synthesis of CAM, Force analysis 
using Newtonian solution approach -  simultaneous equation solution  
 
Reference Books 
1. Ghosh, A.  & Mallik, A.  K., (2009), Theory of Mechanisms, and Machines, 3rd Edition, East West Press 
2. Norton, R. L., (2009), Kinematics and Dynamics of Machinery, Tata McGraw Hill 
3. Uicker, J. J., Pennock, G. R. and Shigley, J. E., (2009), Theory of Machines and Mechanisms,  3rd Edition,  

Oxford University Press 
4. Waldron, K. J. & Kinzel, G. L., (2004), Kinematics, Dynamics and Design of Machinery, 2nd Edition,  Wiley 
5. Thomson, W. T., Theory of Vibrations with Applications, CBS Publishers & Distributors 
6. Paul, B., Kinematics and Dynamics of Planar Mechanisms’, Prentice Hall, 1979. 

29 
 



 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Ashok K Mallik, Kinematics of Machines, NPTEL Course,  Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT 

Kanpur, Link: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112104121/ 
2. Amitabh Ghosh, Dynamics of Machines, NPTEL Course,  Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT 

Kanpur, Link: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/104/112104114/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 



Title Design of Machine Elements Number ME4XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–2–0 [4] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Programme Compulsory (PC) 

Prerequisite Basic knowledge in Mechanics   
and kinematics 

Objectives  
1. Understand the nomenclature and selection of machine elements 
2. To be able to design machine components taking into consideration stress concentration, failure and 

fatigue. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Understanding  different types of failure modes of machine components  and their role in engineering 

design 
2. To compare the design options  involving  various machine elements used in the machine design process 

and to graphically represent them using computer aided design software 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Engineering Design[5 Lectures]: Life cycle approach to Design, Mechanical Engineering Design, 
Design Considerations, Design Methods, Engineering Materials and their Mechanical properties Use, types 
of codes & standards in Design, Selection of preferred sizes, Behavior of Ductile & Brittle material, Stress-
Strain Diagram for various materials. Material selection  in design 
Design for strength [5 Lectures]: Failure Criteria such as Maximum Normal and Shear Stress theory, Distortion 
energy theory;  
 Stress Concentration [4 Lectures]: Stress concentration factor, Stresses in members subjected to axial, shear, 
Bending, Torsional & Eccentric loading, Fatigue Failure, Endurance Limit & Strength.  
Design of members [5 Lectures]: Problems on design of members for finite & infinite life in members subjected 
to individual & combined loading.  
Design of shaft and couplings [5 Lectures]: Types, Design of solid & hollow shaft on strength and rigidity basis 
with steady loading subjected to pure torsion. Design of shafts carrying pulleys & gears (Combined loading). 
ASME Code for shaft design.  Selection and design of Keys, Cotter & Knuckle Joints and couplings. 
Classification and Selection of Bearings. 
Design of Riveted, Bolted and Welded joints [5 Lectures] 
Design of Helical springs [3 Lectures] 
Classification and selection steps for main components of belt, rope and chain drives [4 Lectures] 
Classification, application and design consideration of clutches and brakes [4 Lectures] 
 
Laboratory Classes [12 Classes] 
1. Experimental sessions on machine drawing exercises (sketching and on CAD software) 
2. Design project 

 
Textbook 
1. Shigley, J. E., Mischke, C., Nisbett, K., and Richard, B., (2008), Mechanical Engineering Design, McGraw Hill 

Education 
2. Spotts, M. F. & Shamp, T. E., (2003), Design of Machine Elements, Prentice Hall 
3. Sidheswar, K. N, & Sastry, P. V. V. V., (1997), Machine Drawing, Tata McGraw Hill 
4. Cencil Jensen, Jay D. Helsel, Dennis R. Short, (2012), Engineering Drawing & Design, 7th  Edition, TATA 

McGRAW-HILL 
5. Mahadevan, K., Reddy,K.B. (2013), Design Data Handbook for Mechanical Engineers, CBS Publishers & 

Distributors  
6. Dieter, Engineering Design, 4th Ed., McGraw-Hill, 2013. 

 
 
 
 
 

31 
 



Title Control of Mechanical Systems Number  MEL3XX0 
Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–4 [5] 
Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program Compulsory 

(PC) 
Prerequisite Basic Knowledge of Systems   
Objectives 
1. Familiarize with methods to characterize dynamical behaviour of a mechanical system using the models 
2. Provide an understanding of the basic concepts of control theory. 
3. Provide a basic understanding of implementing control laws.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Develop necessary mathematical models from the knowledge of the mechanical engineering discipline, 

and become familiar with various strategies for their representation and solution 
2. Ability to design control systems for LTI systems and implementation using embedded hardware.  
 
Contents 
Part I: System Modeling and Response [14] 
Introduction to Modelling & Representation [5 Lectures]: Objective, basic modelling concepts & types of models, 
Models of simple mechanical systems, linearization of nonlinear models, Transfer Function Modeling of 
LTI systems, block diagram representation and manipulation, signal flow graphs.  
 
Basic Characteristics of Feedback System [4 Lectures]: Properties of feedback systems, sensitivity analysis, effect 
of control gain on system performance, effect of disturbances on system performance.  
 
Response & Stability Analyses [5 Lectures]: Test signals, response of 1st and 2nd order, as well as, higher-order 
systems, poles and zeros and its effect on system response, Stability criteria, BIBO stability, Routh’s stability 
criterion.  
 
Part II: Control of Mechanical Systems [14] 
Introduction to Control [2 Lectures]: Control objectives, introduction to control problem, open/ closed-loop 
control and structures. 
 
Root- Locus and Compensator Design [6 Lectures]: Concept of root locus; use of control gain to change pole locations, 
design of lag, lead and lag-lead compensators using root locus techniques, PI, PD and PID controller design 
 
Applications of control to Mechanical Systems [4 Lectures]: Practical aspect of control implementation - Actuators, 
sensors; Temperature control, Flow control, Pressure and Force control, Vehicle Active Suspension Control, 
Robot control 
 
Implementation of Control Law [2 Lecturer]: Discretization of control law, Difference equation, computational 
aspect of control law    
 
Part III Embedded Hardware for Control Implementation [14 Lectures ] 
Introduction to Embedded Processors [08 Lectures]: Concept of Processors; Microprocessors and 
Microcontrollers, Architecture of ARM M0 processors, Memory Interfacing, Memory-mapped peripherals, 
peripherals like GPIOs, Timers, analog inputs.   
 

Programming of Embedded Processor [06 Lectures]: Introduction to Arm Mbed development 
environment, use of  Arm Mbed for programming Embedded processors, digital I/Os and analog I/Os 
interface. Implementing PI, PID controllers using embedded processors 

 
Laboratory Classes (12 Classes) 
1. Control simulation of different systems i.e. temperature control, robot control using MATLAB as a tool 

[3 Lab classes]  
2. Experiments on DC servo position control, inverted pendulum, helicopter emulator system, Active 

suspension, robot control [6 Lab classes] 
3. Controller implementation using embedded hardware, interfacing sensors and actuators and 

implementation of PI [3 Lab classes] 
 

32 
 



Textbook: 
1. Nise, N.S. (2014), Control Systems Engineering, 6th Edition, John-Wiley India,  2014 
2.  G.  F.  Franklin,  J.  D.  Powell and A.  E.  Emami-Naeini (2002),  Feedback Control of Dynamic Systems;  

Prentice Hall Inc.,  
3. Perry Xiao., (2018), Designing Embedded Systems and the Internet of Things (IoT) with the ARM® 

Mbed™, John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Ogata, K. (2012), Modern Control Engineering, 5th Edition, Prentice-Hall India, 2012, 
2. Gopal, M. (2000), Control Systems - Principles & Design, 3rdEdition, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2015 
3.  Dorf, R.C. & Bishop, R.H. (2008), Modern Control Systems, 11th Edition, Pearson, 200 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Gopal, M.,  Control Engineering, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 

Institute of Technology  Delhi,   https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108102043/ 
2. Ramkrishna Pasumarthy R., Control Engineering, NPTEL Course Material Department of Electrical 

Engineering, IIT Madras, Link: https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_ee12/preview   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

33 
 



Title Manufacturing Processes Number  MEL2XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 

Prerequisite ----   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Impart fundamental understanding of various casting, welding and forming processes.  
2. Discuss design methodology and process parameters involve in obtaining defect free component.  
3. Discuss tools, techniques and equipment involved in casting, welding and forming processes.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Select appropriate primary manufacturing process and related parameters for obtaining initial shape 

and size of components.  
2. Design and develop adequate tooling linked with casting, welding and forming operations.  
 
Contents 
Module 1: Metal Casting Processes [14 Lecture]:  
Introduction to Casting [3 Lectures]: Casting Terminology, Types of pattern and allowances, Applications and 
Challenges. 
Design of various parts [4 Lecture]: Riser and Gating system design, Design principles for mould cavity. 
Solidification [3 Lecture]: Metal flow and solidification; solidification and cooling of casting. 
Types of casting process and defects [4 Lecture]: Expendable and Permanent Mould Casting Processes, Die 
casting and centrifugal casting, Casting defects and inspection of castings. 
 
Module 2: Welding [14 Lecture]: 
 Introduction to Joining Processes [3 Lecture]: Basic requirements and classification of welding processes; Arc 
Welding Processes, Arc welding principle, Welding power source and its characteristics. 
Arc Welding Processes [4 Lecture]: TIG&MIG processes and their parameters; Introduction to other welding 
processes such as submerged arc welding (SAW), shielded metal arc welding (SMAW) 
Advance welding processes [3 Lecture]:Resistance welding processes,  friction stir welding (FSW). 
Weldability and thermal aspects [3 Lecture]: Concept of weldability of materials; Thermal Effects in Welding 
(Distortion, shrinkage and residual stresses in welded structures); Welding defects and remedies. 
Allied processes [1 Lecture]: Soldering and Brazing. 
 
Module 3: Metal Forming Processes [14 lecture]:  
Introduction of metal forming process [5 Lecture]: Mechanical behavior of metals in elastic and plastic 
deformation, stress-strain relationships, Yield criteria, Application to tensile testing, train rate and 
temperature in metal working;  Hot deformation, Cold working and annealing. 
Metal Working Processes [5 lecture]: Fundamentals of metal working, Analysis of bulk forming processes like 
forging, rolling, extrusion, wire drawing by slab method,  
Other sheet metal processes [4 Lecture]: Sheet metal forming processes (Die and punch assembly, Blanking, 
piercing, bending etc., Compound and Progressive die), High Energy rate forming processes.  

Text book: 
1. Ghosh, A. and Mallik, A. K., (2017), Manufacturing Science, East-West Press. 
2. Parmar R. S., (2007), Welding Processes and Technology, Khanna Publishers. 

Reference Books 
1. Heine, R. W., Loper, C. R., and Rosenthal, P. C., (2008), Principles of Metal Casting, Tata McGraw Hill.  
2. Conne, L. P., (1989), Welding Handbook- Welding Technology Part-1, American Welding Society.  
3. Black, S. C., Chiles, V, Lissaman, A. J., and Martin, S. J., (1996), Principles of Engineering Manufacture, 

Butterworth-Heinemann.  
4. Groover, M. P., (2011), Introduction to Manufacturing Processes, Wiley. 
5. Kalpakjian, S., and Schmid, S. R., (2001), Manufacturing Engineering and Technology, Pearson.  
6. Riggs, J. L., (1976), Production System-Planning Analysis and Control, John Wiley. 

34 
 



Self-Learning Material  
1. D. B. Karunakar, Metal Casting,  NPTEL Course Department of Mechanical and Industrial 

Engineering, IIT Roorkee, Link: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112107083/ 
2. P. Biswas, Fundamental of Welding Science and Technology, Department of Mechanical Engineering, 

IIT Guwahati,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112107083/ 
3. P. K. Jha, Principles of Metal Forming Technology, Department of Mechanical and Industrial 

Engineering, IIT Roorkee, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112107250/   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

35 
 



Title Machining Science and Metrology Number  MEL3XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 

Prerequisite ----   

Objectives 
1. Impart fundamental understanding of various conventional and non-conventional machining 

processes.  
2. Discuss various measuring and gauging techniques used for inspection of machined components. 
3. Discuss various techniques for improvement and assessment of the surface finish. 

Learning Outcomes 
1. Appreciate theories of material removal associated with conventional and non-conventional machining 

processes. 
2. Understand various aspects related with finishing and super-finishing processes. 
3. Apply different inspection techniques to assess the dimensional accuracy of machined components.  

 
Contents 
Module 1: Conventional Machining Processes [17 Lecture]: 
Introduction [1 Lecture]: Machining Process; Basic working principle of conventional machining processes. 
Tool and Chip formation [4 Lecture]: Configuration, Specification and Classification of machine tools; 
Mechanics of Metal Cutting: Geometry of single point cutting tools; Mechanism of chip formation; 
Orthogonal and oblique cutting. 
Force and temperature analysis [5 Lecture]: Analysis of machining forces and power requirement; Causes, 
effects and control of cutting temperature; Application of cutting fluids. 
Machinability and tool life [3 Lecture]: Machinability concept; Tool Wear; Failure of cutting tools and tool life; 
Cutting Tool Materials; Economics of metal cutting. 
Finishing process [4 Lecture]: Finishing and Super-Finishing Processes: Purpose and application of grinding; 
Selection of grinding wheels and their conditioning methods; Specific energy and power requirement in 
grinding; Super-finishing processes such as Honing, Lapping etc. 

Module 2: Advanced Machining Processes [15 Lecture]:  
Introduction [2 Lecture]: Comparison of non-conventional and conventional methods of machining; 
Classification of the processes; Advantages, limitations and applications. 
Mechanical Processes [7 Lecture]: Abrasive Jet Machining Process, process parameters effect on material 
removal rate, Water Jet Machining (WJM) process; Abrasive Water Jet Machining (AWJM) process; 
Ultrasonic Machining (USM), Material removal in USM. 
Thermo-electric Processes [7 Lecture]: Electric Discharge Machining (EDM); Use of LASERs in machining and 
Laser Beam Machining, Electron Beam Machining (EBM) and Plasma Machining (PM). 
Electrochemical Processes [2 Lecture]: Electroplating and reverse-electroplating; Electro Chemical Machining 
(ECM). 

Module 3: Metrology [10 Lecture]: 
Introduction [3 Lecture]: Introduction to metrology and its relevance; Standardization; Limits, fits and 
tolerances, tolerance grades. 
Measurement [7 Lecture]: Measurement of linear and angular dimensions; Measurement of geometric error 
such as straightness, flatness, parallelism, squareness, circularity and roundness; Surface Metrology: 
Surface topography definitions, Measurement of surface texture, Methods for measurement. 

Text book: 
1. Shaw, M C, (2014), Metal Cutting Principles, Oxford University Press.  
2. McGeough, J A, (1988), Advanced Methods of Machining, Springer.  
3. Mitutoyo, (2015), Metrology Handbook, Mitutoyo. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Chattopadhyay, A B, (2013), Machining and Machine Tools, Wiley India.  
2. Galyer, J F W, Shotbolt, C R, (1990), Metrology for Engineers, Cassell. 

36 
 



3. Boothroyd, G., and Knight, W. A., (1932), Fundamentals of Machining and MAchine Tools, CRC Press. 

Self-Learning Material  
1. V. K. Jain, Advanced Machining Processes, NPTEL Course Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT 

Kanpur, Link: http://nptel.ac.in/courses/112104028/. 
2. M. S. Shunmugam, Metrology, NPTEL Course Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT Madras, 

Link: http://nptel.ac.in/courses/112106138/. 
3. U. S. Dixit, Mechanics of Machining, NPTEL Course Department of Mechanical Engineering 

Guwahati, Link: http://nptel.ac.in/courses/112103248/. 
4.  A. B. Chattopadhyay, Manufacturing Processes II, NPTEL Course of Department of Mechanical 

Engineering, IIT Kharagpur,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/105/112105126/. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

37 
 



Title Productions and Operations Management Number  MEL3XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program Compulsory 
(PC) 

Prerequisite ----   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  Familiarize students with basic concepts, techniques and algorithms that help in optimizing the 

performance of manufacturing systems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Appreciate the need of developing mathematical models of conflicting situations and analyze the same;  
2. Select rational options in practical decision-making problems using various techniques and algorithms.  

Contents 
Module 1: Introduction (14 Lecture) 
Introduction [2 Lecture]: System concept of manufacturing; Types of manufacturing systems; Concept of 
productivity. 
Linear Programming [6 Lecture]: Introduction to Linear Programming Problem (LPP); Formulation of 
mathematical model; Applications of LPP; Solution techniques for LPP such as graphical method, simplex 
method and its variants; Special issues in LPP e.g. degeneracy, multiple optimum solutions, infeasibility, 
unbounded feasible region; Sensitivity analysis. 
Transportation problem and Assignment Problem [6 Lecture]: Transportation problem and its applications; 
Solution methods for transportation problem; Transhipment problem; Assignment problem and its 
applications; Solution techniques for assignment problem; Traveling salesman problem. 
 
Module 2: Inventory Management (14 Lecture) 
Introduction [3 Lecture]: Basic concept and terminology; Inventory classification and inventory costs; 
Concept of Economic Order Quantity. 
Deterministic inventory models [3 Lecture]: Probabilistic inventory models; ABC analysis. 
Project Management [1 Lecture]: Introduction and terms used in project management; Construction of 
network diagram. 
PERT/CPM [4 Lecture]:Deterministic network model - CPM; Probabilistic network model – PERT; Crashing 
of network; Resource leveling and smoothing techniques. 
Waiting Line Models [3 Lecture]:Introduction and terms used in queuing models; Kendall’s notations; 
Classification of queuing models; Mathematical analysis of queuing system using various models; Queuing 
costs  

Module 3: Forecasting (14 Lecture) 
Forecasting [4 Lecture]: Nature and use of forecast; various forecasting models; Measure of forecasting 
accuracy; Selection of forecasting techniques. 
Material Management [4 Lecture]:Product design considerations, Product development, Detailing, Value 
Engineering and its role in product design and cost rationalization, IPR.   
Maintenance Management [3 Lecture]:  Objectives,  Nature of maintenance problems,  Maintenance strategies,  
Organization,  Maintenance Information Systems,  Spare Parts Management,  Maintenance Cost Control,  
Introduction to Total Productive Maintenance. 
Work study [3 Lecture]:Purpose and scope,  Productivity and work-study,  Method Study and Work 
Measurement; Engineering economy and costing:Fixed cost, variable cost, introduction to break even 
analysis. 
 

Text book 
1. Buffa E S and Sarin R K, (1987), Modern Production/Operations Management, Wiley.  
2. Taha H A, (2010), Operations Research: An Introduction, Pearson.  

38 
 



Reference Books 
1. Sen R, (2016), Operations Research, Prentice Hall. 
2. Hiller F S and Liberman G J, (2005), Introduction to Operations Research, McGraw Hill.  
3. Pai J K, (2010), Operations Research, Oxford University Press.  

Self-Learning Material  
1. G Srinivasan, Operations Research, NPTEL Course Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT Madras, 

Link: http://nptel.ac.in/courses/112106134/1 
2. A Kanda, Project and Production Management, NPTEL Course Department of Mechanical Engineering, 

IIT Delhi, Link: http://nptel.ac.in/courses/112102106/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

39 
 



Title Digital Fabrication  Number  MEL3XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 

Prerequisite --   

Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. discuss various techniques involved for the digital presentation of objects  
2. cover fundamentals of various digital manufacturing processes (additive and subtractive) and 

inspection technologies to demonstrate its potential in modern manufacturing industries 
3. introduce concepts of smart manufacturing and Industry 4.0 in manufacturing industries 

Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. develop and manipulate digital models of physical objects  
2. program and execute various operations on digital subtractive and additive manufacturing processes  
3. appreciate the recent manufacturing trends related to Industry 4.0 and its implementation 
 
Contents 
Digital design (14 Lectures): 
Geometric design [7 Lectures]:Geometric design of curves, surfaces and solids  
Shape digitization[7 Lectures]: 3-D object scanning, solid reconstruction from point cloud and tessellated data  

Digital manufacturing (14 lectures):  
Subtractive manufacturing [5 Lectures]: 
Basic programming architecture [5 Lectures]: Control hardware and software details, Tooling, sculptured 
surface machining. 
Additive Manufacturing [4 Lectures]: Introduction to various processes, capabilities and limitations, various 
applications of AM  

Introduction of Industry 4.0 (14 lectures): 
Introduction to Smart Manufacturing [7 Lectures]: IoT applications in Manufacturing, Cloud applications in 
manufacturing. 
Introduction to Computer Aided Process Planning (CAPP)[7 Lectures]: Algorithms for CAPP, CAD-CAM 
development, Industry 4.0 applications in Product Development  
 
Text Book 
1. Zeid, I and Subramanian R, (2010), CAD/CAM Theory and Practice, Tata McGraw Hill.  
2. Smid P., (2005), CNC Programming Handbook, Industrial Press. 
3. Gibson I, Rosen D W, Stucker B, (2015), Additive Manufacturing Technologies: Rapid Prototyping to Direct 

Digital Manufacturing, Springer. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Chua C K, Leong K F, Lim C S, (2012), Rapid Prototyping, World Scientific. 
2. Marciniak K, (2006), Geometric Modeling for Numerically Controlled Machining, Oxford University Press 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Asimava Roy Choudhury, CNC Machine Tools and Processes, NPTEL Course Material Department of 

Mechanical Engineering, IIT Guwahati, Link: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112105211/ 
2. John Hart, Additive Manufacturing, MIT Online courseware, Link: 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ICjQ0UzE2Ao 

 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 



Title Manufacturing Processes and Systems Lab Number  MEP3XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2[1] 

Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program 
Compulsory (PC) 

Prerequisite Fundamentals of Manufacturing Processes and Systems   

Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. demonstrate concepts related with primary manufacturing processes by conducting various practical 

exercises    
2. familiarize students with various simulation tools involved in manufacturing processes and systems  
3. explain the software tools and skills required for optimization of manufacturing systems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Appreciate the effect of process parameters on quality of manufactured components  
2. Use various simulation tools and software for designing manufacturing processes and systems 
 
Contents (13-14 classes) 
1. Studying the effect of the clay and moisture content on sand mold properties 
2. Derivation of cooling curve and mold thermal gradient using thermocouple and data acquisition system  
3. Studying the effect of welding process parameters on bead profile using image processing system  
4. Analysing the problem of heat balance using resistance spot welding setup  
5. Effect of interface lubrication and temperature on bulk deformation characteristics using hydraulic press  
6. Sheet metal punch/die design and layout optimization  
7. Solving linear programming problems using LINGO software  
8. Demonstration of  material flow and solidification simulation using Auto-Cast software  
9. Derivation of isotherms and estimation of bead profile using Ansys Software  
10. Development of computational tool using Microsoft excel for solving transportation/Assignment and 

Inventory management problem.  
 
Reference Books 
1. Laboratory manual of various equipment. 
2. Reveillac J, (2017), Operational research using the spread sheet. Wiley. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

41 
 



Title Machining and Automated Manufacturing Lab Number  MEP4XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2[1] 

Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 

Prerequisite Fundamentals of Manufacturing Processes and   
Systems 

Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Demonstrate concepts related with conventional and non-conventional  machining processes by 

conducting various practical exercises  
2. Demonstrate various inspection technologies to examine dimensional control of components  
3. Discuss manual and automated programming of CNC machine tools 
4. Demonstrate steps related to additive manufacturing of components 

Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Appreciate the effect of process parameters on quality of machined components  
2. Use various simulation tools and software related to machining processes 
3. Build and inspect components fabricated using additive processes 
4. Generate and execute part programs for CNC machine tools 

Contents (13-14 classes) 
1. Effect of process parameters on machinability and surface characteristics of machined components  
2. Measurement of cutting forces and analysing effect of process parameters in machining operation  
3. Analysing machining characteristic of hard materials using Laser Beam Machining  
4. Demonstration of hybrid machining concept using Ultrasonic Machining set up  
5. Study of machinability characteristics of various materials using DEFORM software  
6. Manual part programming using CNC turning simulator  
7. Manual part programming using CNC milling simulator  
8. Generation of CNC part programs and CAD/CAM integration  
9. Demonstration of process flow in Additive Manufacturing and discussion of case studies 

10. Measurement of freeform geometries using contact and noncontact inspection systems  
 
Reference Books 
1. Shaw M C, (2015), Metal Cutting Principles, Oxford University Press. 
2. Smid P., (2005), CNC Programming Handbook, Industrial Press. 
3. Chua C K, Leong K F, Lim C S, (2012), Rapid Prototyping, World Scientific. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 



Title Smart Manufacturing Number  MEL4XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [2] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Program Compulsory (PC) 

Prerequisite --   

Objectives: 
The instructor will: 
Introduce students to the fundamentals of smart manufacturing and Industry 4.0 

Learning Outcomes: 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Appreciate concepts and basic framework necessary for smart manufacturing 
2. Develop understanding about harnessing smartness into manufacturing processes from the data 

Contents: 
Introduction: 
Introduction [5 Lecture]: Introduction to manufacturing processes and systems; Industrial revolutions, 
Background and concept of smart manufacturing. 
Models and key technologies for smart technologies [3 Lecture] 
Automated manufacturing processes [6 lectures]: Elements of smart manufacturing process; sensing elements 
and IoT technologies; data-driven models. 
Decision making systems [4 Lecture]: Decision making systems, Case Studies.  
Automated manufacturing systems: 
Concept of mass production [5 Lecture]: Precision manufacturing, flexible manufacturing and agile 
manufacturing; Concept of edge, fog and cloud computing in manufacturing  
Big data and services in smart manufacturing [5 Lecture]: AR, VR and Mixed Reality in Manufacturing, Case 
Studies  

Text Book: 
1. Wang L, and Vincent W X, (2019), Cloud Based Cyber-Physical Systems in Manufacturing, Springer.  
2. Tao F, Zhang M, and Nee A Y C, (2019), Digital Twin Driven Smart Manufacturing, Academic Press. 

Reference Books: 
Jeschke S, Brecher C, Song H, and Rawat D B, (2017), Industrial Internet of Things – Cyber manufacturing Systems, 
Springer  

Self-Learning Material  
MIT Online Course on Smart Manufacturing: https://professional.mit.edu/course-catalog/smart-
manufacturing-moving-static-dynamic-manufacturing-operations 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 



15. Detailed Course Content of Programme Elective Courses 

Title Turbomachinery Number ME4XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Programme Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite Basics of Fluid Mechanics and   
Thermodynamics 

Objectives  
1. To teach about different types of turbomachines used in energy transformations 
2. To introduce basic principles and equation governing the steady and unsteady fluid flow associated with 

Turbomachinery 
3. To impart knowledge of designing turbines vanes using velocity triangles 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. To analyse the flow behaviour which depends on the geometric configuration of various turbomachines 
2. Identify and analyse the thermal cycles related to turbomachines 
3. Turbo-machine stage characterization using various design parameters 

Contents 
Introduction [3 Lectures]:Classifications, Eulers equation of Turbomachines, Concept of velocity triangles, 
Expression of Eulers equation showing the components of energy transfer 
Dimensional analysis of incompressible Turbomachines [3 Lectures]: Similarity laws and model testing., concept of 
specific speed and specific diameter, affinity laws, unit quantities 
Hydraulics Turbines [5 Lectures]:Impulse and reaction machines, Analysis of Pelton-Turbine, efficiencies, 
performance characteristics, Analysis of Francis Turbine, Analysis of Kaplan Turbine.  
Centrifugal Pumps [5 Lectures]: Introduction to pumping systems, Centrifugal pumps working principle, 
Efficiencies, losses, operating characteristics, pumps in series and parallel, NPSH, priming and cavitation. 
Compressible flow Turbomachines [6 Lectures]:Introduction to compressible flows, flow choking, review of T-S and 
H-S diagrams of gas turbines and compressors, efficiencies, effect of reheat and preheat. Dimensional analysis 
of compressible flow machines. Lift and drag, blade cascading concept 
Centrifugal Compressors [5 Lectures]: Centrifugal compressors, construction, flow analysis, performance analysis, 
stalling and surging.   
Axial Compressors and Turbines [5 Lectures]: Axial flow compressors, construction details, stage velocity triangles, 
degree of reaction, stage pressure rise, stage pressure coefficient, stage efficiency, Axial Turbines. 
Steam turbines [4 Lectures]: Overview, impulse turbine, speed ratio, idea of velocity and pressure compounding. 
Reaction stages-50% and 100% reaction 
Fans and blowers [4 Lectures]: Axial fans: velocity triangle, stage parameters, performance characteristics 
Centrifugal fan: velocity triangle, stage parameters and performance characteristics. 
Turbomachines used in power transmission[2 Lectures]: Fluid coupling, Torque converter 
 
Textbook 
1. Dixon, S. L., (2005), Fluid Mechanics & Thermodynamics of Turbomachinery, 5th Edition, Elsevier Science 
2. Cohen, H., Rogers, G. F. C., and Saravanamuttoo, H. I. H., Gas Turbine Theory, Longman Publishing Group 
 
Reference Books 
1. Sheperd, D. G., Principles of Turbomachinery, Mac Millan 
2. Kearton, W. J., Steam Turbine Theory and Practice, CBS Publishers & Distributors 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

44 
 



Title Refrigeration and Air-conditioning Number ME4XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Programme Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite Basic Knowledge in Thermodynamics,   
Thermofluids Engineering 

Objectives  
To study the characteristics and engineering design of heating, ventilating, air conditioning and refrigeration 
and to enable the students to achieve effective and efficient design solutions. 

Learning Outcomes 
1. The students will learn to explain and analyze the refrigeration systems, their various components, and to 

apply them in real system analysis. 
2. They will demonstrate the knowledge of basic principles of refrigeration cycle and psychometry. 

Contents 
Introduction [2 Lectures]: Definition, Necessity, Methods of refrigeration, Coefficient of performance (COP), 
Fundamentals of air-conditioning systems,  
Air Refrigeration Systems [5 Lectures]: Carnot refrigeration cycle, Brayton refrigeration or the Bell Coleman air 
refrigeration cycle, Air craft refrigeration system, Simple cooling and simple evaporative types, Regenerative 
type, Comparison of different systems; 
Vapour Compression (VC) Refrigeration Systems [5 Lectures]: Simple VC refrigeration system - Limitations of 
reversed Carnot cycle with vapor as the refrigerant, Analysis of VC cycle considering degrees of sub cooling 
and super heating, Multistage and cascade refrigeration systems 
Refrigerants [4 lectures]: Definition, Classification, Nomenclature, Desirable properties, Comparative study, 
Introduction to eco-friendly Refrigerants, binary and azeotropic mixtures, alternate refrigerants. 
Other Refrigeration Systems [5 Lectures]: Vapour Absorption Refrigeration System Basic Systems, Actual COP of 
the system, Performance, Relative merits and demerits, Electrolux refrigeration, Steam jet refrigerating system 
- Introduction, Analysis, Relative merits and demerits, Performance applications,  
Psychrometry of Air & Air Conditioning Processes [5 Lectures]: Properties of moist Air-Gibbs Dalton law, Specific 
humidity, Dew point temperature, Degree of saturation, Relative humidity, Enthalpy, Wet bulb temperature, 
Thermodynamics wet bulb temperature, Psychometric chart, Psychometry of air-conditioning processes, 
Mixing process, Basic processes in conditioning of air. 
Load Calculations [4 Lectures]: Outside and inside design conditions, Sources of heating and cooling load, Heat 
transfer through structure, Solar radiation, Electrical applications, Infiltration and ventilation, Heat generation 
inside conditioned space, Human physiology, Comfort chart. 
Controls & Accessories [4 Lectures]: Classifications, Layout of plants, Equipment selection, Air distribution 
system, Duct system design, Filters, Refrigerant piping, Design of summer air-conditioning and Winter air 
conditioning systems, Temperature sensors, Pressure sensors, Humidity sensors, Actuators, Safety controls, 
Accessories; 
Equipment design and selection [4 Lectures]: Type of compressors and their performance curves, Types of 
condensers, Heat transfer in condensers, Types of expansion devices, Types of evaporators, Cooling and 
dehumidifying coils. 
HVAC design for buildings [4 lectures]: Design considerations, Ductwork, Cooling towers, Enclosed stairwells 
and elevator shafts, Smoke exhaust, Noise and vibration considerations, Mechanical equipment rooms, 
Ventilation requirements, Water piping, airflow requirements.  
 
Textbook 
1. Jordan, R. C. & Priester, G. B., (2003), Refrigeration & Air conditioning, Prentice Hall of India 
2. Arora, C. P., (2008), Refrigeration & Air conditioning, Tata McGraw Hill 
3. Stocker, W. F. & Jones, J. W., (2000), Refrigeration & Air conditioning, Tata McGraw Hill 
4. Prasad, M., (1999), Refrigeration & Air conditioning, Wiley Eastern Limited 
5. Arora, C. P. & Domkundwar, S., (1985), A course in Refrigeration & Air Conditioning, Dhanpat Rai & Sons 

 
 
 

45 
 



Title Power Plant Engineering Number ME7XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Programme Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite Basic Knowledge in   
Thermodynamics 

Objectives  
To introduce fundamental technologies related to the conversion of energy resources into electrical power 
generation 

Learning Outcomes 
1. Introduction to power plant components, operation and engineering. 
2. Ability to select an appropriate type of power plant for given requirements under different situations 
3. Optimization of energy efficiency of plant with respect to available resources and energy requirement  
 
Contents 
Introduction to power plant Engineering [2 Lectures]: National and International status on power generation and 
use 
Thermal Power Plant [5 Lectures]: Plant layout, Thermal power plant equipment, Types of boilers, performance 
of boilers, super critical steam generator,  
Condenser and steam turbines [3 Lectures]: Performance of condensers, types of steam turbines, draught system, 
Latest development in thermal power plants.  
Gas Turbine Power Plant [4 Lectures]: Plant layout, Power cycles, Combustion chamber and gas turbines 
Combine cycle power plants [5 Lectures]: Load type and calculation, Load variation, Use of internal combustion 
engine plant, plant layout and design calculation, combine cycle efficiency 
Nuclear power plant [4 Lectures]: Principles of nuclear energy, Elements of nuclear power plants, Types of 
nuclear fuel, nuclear reactor, Fast breeder reactors, Next generation nuclear plant,  
Hydroelectric power plant [3 Lectures]: Site selection, plant layout, types of plants, water turbine, plant operation, 
water storage and flow duration 
Solar thermal power plant [5 Lectures]: Introduction to solar thermal power generation, type of solar collectors 
and receivers, daily and yearly load variation, Energy storage, Recent advances in solar power plants 
Wind Turbine [3 Lectures]: Wind energy, types of wind turbine, site selection, turbine efficiency 
Other Non-convectional power plants [3 Lectures]: Introduction to fuel cell, gasification, Ocean thermal energy, 
Tidal energy, geothermal energy, challenges and recent developments,  
Hybrid power system [3 Lectures]: Power system selection, design of hybrid power system, power optimization, 
load distribution, plant efficiency 
Selection of power plant [2 Lectures]: Environmental impact, different types of pollutions, fuel availability, 
Economic aspect  
 
Textbook 
1. Ei-Wakil, M.M, (1985), Power Plant Technology, Tata McGraw-Hill 
2. P. K. Nag, Power Plant Engineering, Tata McGraw-Hill, 
3. F. T. Morse, Power Plant Engineering, D. Van Nostran, New York, 
 
Self-Learning 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112107291/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

46 
 



Title Solar Thermal Systems Number ME6XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Programme 
Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  
1. To deliver knowledge of fundamental principles of solar energy and their utilization.  
2. To make students familiar with the potential of solar energy to meet the growing energy demands of society 

in a sustainable way. 
3. To introduce solar thermal systems and related technologies. 

 Learning Outcomes 
1. Knowledge to explain the technical and physical principles of solar collectors and solar thermal systems. 
2. Ability to perform measurements on a wide variety of solar thermal systems and to evaluate their 

performance. 
3. Ability to design solar thermal systems from energy requirements. 

Contents 
Introduction[2 Lectures]: Energy demand and supply, energy crisis, conventional and non-conventional energy 
resources, solar energy applications. 
Solar Radiation [4 Lectures]: Solar radiation, attenuation by atmosphere, solar radiation on earth, measurement, 
utilization of data. 
Flat Plate Solar Collector [5 Lectures]: General description of flat plate collectors, general characteristics, 
performance, short term and long term performance, design. 
Concentrating Solar Collector [5 Lectures]: General description of focusing solar collectors, concentrators, 
receivers and orienting systems, general characteristics, performance, materials, design. 
Energy Storage [5 Lectures]: Energy storage in a solar process system, different types of storages, characteristics, 
and capacity of storage medium, solar pond. 
Solar Cooling and Heating [4 Lectures]: Passive heating and cooling, nocturnal radiation, Solar Cooking, Solar 
Desalination, Solar drying, Solar greenhouse. 
Solar Cooling and Heating [4 Lectures]: Active heating and cooling, solar water/air heaters, absorption cooling, 
combined solar heating and cooling systems, performance, economics of solar heating and cooling. 
Solar Thermal Power and Process heat [5 Lectures]: Solar thermal power, Examples: Rankine solar thermal power 
plant, Stirling Cycle, Solar industrial process heat.   
Solar Thermal Design[4 Lectures]: Concept of system design, performance index, Simulation of Process, System 
performance, Design methods. 
Economics and policies for Solar Energy [4 Lectures]: Definitions, Life cycle Costing, Economic Analysis, Payback 
period, current policies, clean development. 
 
Textbook 
1. John A. Duffie, William A. Beckman. John, (2013), Solar Engineering of Thermal Processes, Fourth Edition, 

Wiley & Sons, Inc.  
2. Garg, H.P and Prakash, J, (2012) Solar Energy: Fundamentals and Applications, Tata McGraw – Hill Education 
3. Tiwari, G.N. (2002), Solar Energy Fundamentals, Design, Modelling and Applications. Narosa publishing House, 

Delhi 
4. Sukhatme, P, K and Nayak, J.K. (2008), Solar Energy, Tata McGraw-Hill Education, 3rd Ed. 

Self-Learning Material 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/105/112105051/ (video course) 
2. Excerpts, references, reading material, examples, problems & their solutions will be made available at the 

time of the course. 

 
  

47 
 



Title Non-Conventional Sources of Energy and Number ME7XX 
Emerging Technologies 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech/M.Sc./M.Tech/M.Tech- Type Programme Elective (PE) 
Ph.D./Ph.D. 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Deliver knowledge of fundamental principles of non-conventional sources of energy and their utilization. 
2. Teach important technologies of producing power from non-conventional and alternative energy sources. 
 
 Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand various energy sources such as solar, wind, hydropower, biomass, geothermal, and emerging 

technologies. 
2. Utilize the potential of non-conventional energy sources and their applications. 
 
Contents 
(Fractal 1) ME7XX1 Principles of Non-Conventional Sources and Solar Energy (1-0-0) 
Introduction to non-conventional energy sources  [4 Lectures]: Availability and form of delivery; Energy consumption 
and conservation; Sustainable development; Standards and Regulations. 
Solar radiation [5 Lectures]: Distribution, measurement and data; Solar energy collectors; Photovoltaic cell; 
Parabolic trough; Parabolic dish; Central receiver system; Solar energy storage. 
Applications of solar energy [5 Lectures]: Solar distillation, Solar cooker, Solar drying, Solar greenhouse, Solar water 
heating, Solar heating and cooling of buildings. 
(Fractal 2) ME7XX2 Wind and Hydro Energy (1-0-0) 
Wind Energy [5 Lectures]: Wind data, Estimation and site selection; Principle of wind energy conversion- system 
and its components; Wind turbine and estimation of power output; Energy storage.  
Application of wind energy [2 Lectures]: Applications and Environmental Aspects.  
Hydro-electric power [5 Lectures]: Introduction and its classification; Typical components of micro/mini 
hydropower station; Water turbine; Pelton wheel turbine; Working principle, Performance and limitations. 
Ocean wave energy [2 Lectures]:  Working principle, Performance and limitations.  
(Fractal 3) ME7XX3 Geothermal, Biomass and Emerging Technologies (1-0-0) 
Geothermal Energy [4 Lectures]: Geothermal sources;Geothermal system and technologies; Ground-source heat 
pumps; Social and environmental aspects; Applications. 
Biomass Energy conversion [4 Lectures]: Biomass conversion technologies, Classification, Advantages, and 
disadvantages; Production of biomass, Photosynthesis; Biogas generation; Properties of biogas and its 
purification; Applications.  
Fuel cell [4 Lectures]: Working principle, Performance and limitations; Hydrogen Energy, Production methods, 
Storage and Transportation.  
Hydrogen as an alternative fuel for vehicles  [2 Lectures] 
Textbook 
1. J. Twidell, T. Weir, Renewable Energy Resources. 3rd Ed., Taylor & Francis Group, London, 2015. 
2. J. A. Duffie, W. A. Beckman, Solar Engineering of Thermal Processes. 4th Ed., Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2013. 
3. B.H.Khan, Non-Conventional Energy Resources. Tata McGraw-Hill Education, New Delhi, 2009. 

Self-Learning Material 
Dr. P. Haridoss, Non-Conventional Energy Resources, NPTEL Course Material, IIT Madras. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/121/106/121106014/ 

 
 
 
 
 

48 
 



Title Porous Media Flows and Applications Number ME6XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Programme Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite Basic knowledge in Fluid Mechanics   

Objectives  
1. To impart the basic dynamic phenomena that occurs in within porous media from a mathematical and 

numerical perspective.  
2. To apply different flow based equation to model porous flows in different media such as biomaterials, 

contaminant separation media, soils, etc.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1.  To exemplify how different porous processes occur in different multi-physical settings. 
2. To apply empirical and deterministic porous media equations to model and design processes occurring in 

distinct phases. 
3. To understand and identify different porous flow phenomena in biological, material transport, chemical as 

well as soil related contexts. 

Contents 
Basic concepts [6 Lectures]: Basics of porous materials, porosity, tortuosity, percolation, infiltration, soils, permeability, 
porous materials, biomaterials and their classifications, flow types, fluid types, nature of different fluids in different setting 
such a bio-fluid flows, ground water flows, water percolation and so on.  
Visualizing and Experimental observation [6lectures] Understanding the porous nature, imaging techniques, microscopy 
and advanced methods, tomography methods, Hydrostatic- permeability measurements, Pressure variation. porosity 
measurement, capillary diaphragm methods, CT-scan and spectrometer method,  
Modelling Basics [6 Lectures]: , Darcy’s thought, Random walks and the advection diffusion equation, Network Models, 
Unit cells, volume averaging, elemental volumes, Statistical Descriptors Fractal Models, Effective Medium, Mixture 
Theories, Double Porosity Models,  
Types of Media [5 lectures] Homogenous porous media, Stokes Thought, Karmen-Kozeny and Ergun’s thought, Hazen-
Dupuit-Darcy (HDD) models, Percolation Wettability, Klinkenberg effects, heterogeneous porous media, 
Mass and Momentum transport [6 Lectures]: Brinkman and Generalized Momentum aspects, Hydrodynamic boundary 
layers, Wall Channelling, Viscous fingering (application of box-counting for fractal dimension),  
Thermal Aspects: [6lectures] Thermal properties and applications, Thermal dispersion, thermal conductivity measurement, 
lumped capacitance models, local thermal Non-equilibrium models, thermodynamics of Interface 
Energy Perspective [6 Lectures]: Forced convection thought, Nusselt numbers, energy equation appended with flows viscous 
dissipation, porous media as heat exchangers, pipes and channels with porous media fillings, Non Darcy flows, Heat 
Generation, Boundary layer calculations.  
 
Textbook 
1. Nield Donald A and Bejan Adrian, Convection in Porous Media, Fifth Edition, Springer Verlag  
2. M. Kaviany, Principles of heat transfer in porous media, Second Edition, Springer Verlag 
3. Arunn Narasimhan, Essentials of Heat and Fluid Flow in Porous Media, Ane Books Pvt Ltd. 
4. Caffarelli L.A., Karakhanyan A.L. (2010) Lectures on Gas Flow in Porous Media. In: Cabrelli C., Torrea J. 

(eds) Recent Developments in Real and Harmonic Analysis. Applied and Numerical Harmonic Analysis. 
Birkhäuser, Boston, MA 

5. Dullien, F.A.L. (1979), Porous Media, Academic Press  
6. Scheidegger, Adrian E. (1974). The Physics of Flow Through Porous Media, 3rd Edition. University of 

Toronto Press  
 

Reference Books 
1. J. Bear, Dynamics of Fluids in Porous Media, Dover, 1972. 
2. J. Cushman, The Physics of Fluids in Hierarchical Porous Media: Angstroms to Miles, Springer, 1997. 

49 
 



3. M. Beran, Statistical Continuum Theories, Wiley Interscience,1968. 
4. S. Torquato, Random Heterogeneous Materials, Springer, 2002. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

50 
 



Title Micro-Nano Flows Number MEL6XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Program Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite Fluid Mechanics & Heat Transfer    

Objectives 
1. To inculcate the physics of liquid transport in micro-nano fabricated systems.   
2. To introduce theory and physical principles of fluid mechanics on the microscale  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Understand physics involved in fluid flow in micro-nano fabricated systems 
2. Solve problems of fluid flows in microchannels 

 
Contents 
Hydrodynamics Review [3 Lectures]: Continuum assumption, Conservation equations at Continuum level, Low 
Reynolds’s no. flows-creeping flows, Physics of miniaturization, Scaling laws. 
Fluid mechanics at Micro-scale [4 Lectures]: Intermolecular forces, States of matter, Governing equations, 
Constitutive relations, Gas and liquid flows, Boundary conditions, Slip theory-first order and higher order 
models, Transition to turbulence. 
Shear driven Flows [6 Lectures]: Couette Flow- Slip flow regime, Transition and Free molecular, Oscillatory 
Couette Flow, Cavity Flow 
Pressure driven Flows [6 Lectures]: Micro channel flows- Slip flow regime, Transition and Free molecular, 
Entrance flows, Effects of Roughness, compressible micro channel flows 
Thermal Effects in Microscales [6 Lectures]: Thermal Creep, Heat Transfer in Poiseuille Microflows- Pressure-
Driven Flows, Force-Driven Flows, Heat Transfer in Couette Microflows 
Surface Tension-Driven Flows [5 Lectures]: Surface tension and interfacial energy, Different forms of Young’s 
Equation, Thin Films, Capillary flows.  
Electrokinetic Flows [6 Lectures]:Electrokinetic Effects, Electric Double Layer, Governing Equations, 
Electroosmotic Flows, Electrophoresis, Dielectrophoresis, Electrocapillary, Continuous electro-wetting, Direct 
 electro-wetting, Electro-wetting on dielectric. 
Microfluidic devices [6 Lectures]: Micropumps,, Microvalves, Microflow sensors, Micromixers, Micropropulsion 
and Micronozzle Flows 
 
Text Book 
1. Karniadakis, G. M, Beskok, A,  Aluru, N, (2005),Microflows and Nanoflows: Fundamentals and Simulation, 

Springer 
2. Nguyen, N. T., Werely, S. T.,  (2002), Fundamentals and applications of Microfluidics, Artech house Inc. 
3. Kirby, B.J., (2010), Micro- and Nanoscale Fluid Mechanics: Transport in Microfluidic Devices, Cambridge 

University Press. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Tabeling, P., (2005), Introduction to microfluidics, Oxford University Press Inc. 
2. Colin, S., (2009), Microfluidics, John Wiley & Sons. 
 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112105187/ 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112106169/ 

 
  

51 
 



Title Microfluidics Lab Number MEL6XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Program Elective (PC) 

Prerequisite Fluid Mechanics & Heat Transfer    

Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Provide the practical knowledge with regard to the fluid flows in micro-nano fabricated systems 
2. Provide practical exposer to various sensors and equipment use in micro system analysis  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. The students will have the ability to: 
2. Design microfluidic systems 
3. Plan experiments to evaluate key performance characteristics of a micro-nano system  
 
Contents 
1. Visualisation of different micro-nano systems 
2. Study of capillary action in conventional, mini and micro channels   
3. Analysis of Laminar Flow and Diffusion in a Microchannel  
4. Analysis of Turbulent Flow in Microchannel  
5. Study of Droplet microfluidics  
6. Electrophoretic Separation in a Microchannel  
7. Demonstration of Paper Microfluidic Device for Blood-Plasma Separation 
8. Measurement of Heat Transfer Coefficient during Flow Through Microchannel 
9. Flow Simulation for  micro-nano systems 
10. Demonstration of ELectrokinetic Flows 
 
Reference Books 
1. Karniadakis, G. M, Beskok, A,  Aluru, N, (2005), Microflows and Nanoflows: Fundamentals and 

Simulation, Springer 
2. Nguyen, N. T., Werely, S. T., Fundamentals and applications of Microfluidics, Artech house Inc., 2002. 
3. Kirby, B.J., Micro- and Nanoscale Fluid Mechanics: Transport in Microfluidic Devices,Cambridge 

University Press, 2010.  

  

52 
 



Title Tool Design  Number  MEL4XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite ----   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. discuss the fundamentals related to design of tools used during various manufacturing operations  
2. principles of fixture design for various components  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
Design tooling and fixtures involved in manufacturing operations 
 
Contents 
Introduction To Tool Design [6 Lectures]: Tool engineering, Tool classifications, Tool design objectives, Tool 
design in manufacturing, Challenges and requirements, Standards in tool design, Tool drawings, Surface 
finish, Fits and tolerances, Tooling materials - Ferrous and nonferrous tooling materials - Carbides, Ceramics 
and Diamond - Non-metallic tool materials, Importance of tool design in PLM, Importance of tool design in 
process planning and selection of machine tool  
Types of cutting tools [5 Lectures]: Single point cutting tools, Design of form tools, Design of drills, Reamers, 
Milling cutters, Broaching tools, Gear cutting tools, Thread cutting tools. 
Cutting tools and tool holding [5 Lectures]: Tool holding methods for CNC machines, ISO standard for Inserts, 
455 Tool holders, Selection of inserts and tool holders for specific applications, Automatic tool changers, Tool 
positioners and Tool presetting in CNC machines.  
Design Of Jigs And Fixtures [8 Lectures]: Locating and supporting principles, Clamping and work holding 
principles, Drill bushes, Design of drill jigs and Milling fixtures, Turning fixtures, Welding fixtures, Modular 
fixtures.  
Design Of Tools For Press Work [8 Lectures]: Study of power presses and accessories, Types of dies, Method of 
die operation, Clearance and cutting force calculations, Pilots, Strippers and pressure pads, Presswork 
materials, Strip layout, Design of blanking and piercing dies, Drawing dies, Bending dies, EDM for press tool 
making.  
Mold elements [3 Lectures]: Mold Elements, Two plate and Three plate mold design, 
Design of parts [4 Lectures]: Design of gates - runners - ejectors, under cut molds, hot runner mold. 
Mold materials and manufacturing [3 Lectures]: Mold materials, mold manufacturing.  

Text Book: 
1. Donaldson C, Lecain G H and Goold V, (2012), Tool Design, Tata McGraw Hill. 
2. Hoffman E. G, Jigs and Fixtures Design, Thomson Learning. 

Reference Books:  
1. Joshi P H, (2010), Jigs and Fixtures, McGraw Hill. 
2. Arshinov V and Alekseev G, (1979), Metal Cutting Theory and Cutting Tool Design, MIR Publication  

Self-Learning Material  
A B Chattopadhyay, Manufacturing Processes II, NPTEL Course Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT 
Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112105126/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

53 
 



Title Applied Ergonomics Number MEL4XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Program Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Teach about Human-Machine system, work study, Physical Ergonomics, Cognitive Ergonomics, Biomechanics, 
Physical Work Environment and Occupational Safety & Health 
 
Learning Outcomes  
Students will be able to  
1. Correlate the understanding of this subject with their day to day activities and will be aware of concepts 

related to enhancing human as well as overall system efficiency. The course syllabus is designed so as to 
cover work physiology, engineering aspect of product, improvement in the cognitive capabilities etc. 

2. Analyze the factors responsible for decreasing the system performance and work on those aspects, thereby 
making an efficient system. 

 
Contents 
Introduction [2 Lectures]: Overview of Ergonomics, Introduction to human-machine system. 
Physical ergonomics [8 Lectures]: Work Physiology, Musculoskeletal system, Metabolism & digestive system, 
Cardiovascular system, Respiratory system  
Anthropometry [8 Lectures]: Design principles, Collection of data & statistical tools). 
Cognitive ergonomics [8 lectures]: Human Sensory system, Perception, Attention resources, Memory, Common 
Cognitive tasks  
Physical work environment [8 Lectures]: Visual environment, Physics of light, Visibility & visual performance 
Lighting system, Auditory environment, Effect noise & permissible noise, Noise control, Climate control, 
Thermoregulation, Heat stress & cold stress  
Biomechanics aspect and work study [4 Lectures]: Anatomical sites important for occupational ergonomics, manual 
work system, tools and techniques for work systems design and assessment 
Industrial/organizational ergonomics [4 Lectures]: Occupational Safety & Health, Case studies over industrial 
problems  
 
Text Books: 
1. Bridger R. S., (2008), Introduction to Ergonomics, 3rd edition, CRC Press 
2. Wickens C. D., (2003), An Introduction to Human Factors Engineering, 2nd edition, Pearson   
3. David C. A. (1986) The practice and management of Industrial Ergonomics, Prentice Hall 
 
Online Course Material: 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/nptel_download.php?subjectid=112104222 

 
  

54 
 



Title Micro-Nano Manufacturing  Number  MEL4XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite ----   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide exposure to students with emerging manufacturing techniques for producing micro- and nano- level 
products 

 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Able to appreciate the processes employed for the fabrication of miniaturized products.  
2. Explain the physical description, modelling and experimentations for manufacturing at micro and nano 

scale.  
 

Contents 
An overview of micro and nano mechanical systems and their applications in Mechanical Engineering [5 Lectures]:  
Nano-machines, Nanomechanics, Nano-metrology, Nano-tribology, Nano-fluidics, Nano-manufacturing. 
MEMS Micro fabrication [7 Lectures]: Science, modelling and experimental aspect of diffusion, thermal 
oxidation, ion implantation, rapid thermal processing, optical lithography, photoresists, non-optical 
photolithography, vacuum processes and plasmas, and etching processes, thin film manufacturing using 
physical vapor deposition, chemical vapor deposition, epitaxial growth processes.  
Silicon Micromachining [5 Lectures]: anisotropic wet chemical etching, wafer bonding, dry plasma etching, 
surface micromachining  
Laser Micromachining methods [2 Lectures] 
Mechanical Micromachining [6 Lectures]: Abrasive micro grinding, micro milling, micro electro discharge 
machining, micro electro chemical machining, nano grinding. 
Beam method [2 Lectures]: focused ion beam and electron beam machining.  
Fabrication of nano materials and nano crystalline materials [7 Lectures]: Characterization techniques such as SEM, 
SPM,AFM,TEM  
Micro- nano patterned surfaces for functional devices [6 Lectures]: application potential of micro and nano 
structured surfaces  
Recent advances in micro & nanofabrication [2 lectures] 
 
Reference Books:  
1. Drexler K E, Nanosystem: Molecular Machinery, Manufacturing and Computation, John Wiley 
2. Rai-Choudhuri P, Handbook of Microlithography, Micromachining and Microfabrication, SPIE Press 
3. McGeough J A, Micromachining of Engineering Materials, Marcel Dekkar 
4. Jain V K,(2011), Introduction to micromachining, Narosa Publications  
5. Cabrini S and Hawata S, (2012), Nano fabrication hand book – CRC press 
 
Self-Learning Material  
K N Bhat, Micro- and Smart Systems, NPTEL Course Material Department of Electrical Engineering, IISc 
Bangalore, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112108092/ 

 
  

55 
 



Title Design and Manufacturing of Number  MEL6XX0 
Biomaterials   

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite ----   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Discuss the fundamental principle in biomedical engineering material science, chemistry. 
2. Enable engineering skills to students needed to solve challenges in the biomaterials and tissue engineering 

domain.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
Appreciate processes used in making of biocompatible materials 
 
Contents 
Classes of materials used in medicine and healthcare [5 Lectures]: Metals, polymers, FRPs, fabrics, nanocomposites, 
ceramics, glasses etc 
Bioresorbable and bio-erodable materials [3 Lectures] 
Host reactions to biomaterials [5 Lectures]: biocompatibility, implant associated infection;  
Testing of biomaterials [5 Lectures]: In vitro assessment, in vivo assessment, blood materials interactions.  
Design of materials for biomedical application [4 Lectures]: Cardiovascular, dental implants, orthopaedic 
application, skin, ophthalmologic applications, wound healing, sutures, 
Biomedical and biosensors [2 Lectures] 
3-D printing of biomaterials [6 Lectures]: Fabrication of nanomaterials, tissue regenerations, laser assisted bio 
printing, scaffolding techniques,  
3-D scaffold for organs, bone regeneration [2 Lectures] 
Implantation techniques for soft tissue and hard tissue replacements [6 Lectures]: Problems and possible solutions in 
implant fixation; 
Failure analysis of medical devices and implants [4 Lectures] 
 
Text Books 
1. Ratner B D, Hoffman A, Schoen F, Lemons J, (2004), Biomaterials Science: An Introduction to Materials in 

Medicine, Academic Press  
2. Park J.B. and Bronzino J.D., (2002), Biomaterials: Principles and Applications. CRC Press. ISBN: 0849314917 
 
Reference Books 
1. Wright T M, and Goodman S B, (2001), Implant Wear in Total Joint Replacement: Clinical and Biologic Issues, 

Material and Design Considerations. American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons.  
2. Ambrosio L, (2009), Biomedical composites, Woodhead Publishing Limited, UK. 
3. Hin T.S., (2004), Engineering Materials for Biomedical Applications. World Scientific. ISBN 981-256-061-0 
 
Self-Learning Material  
M Doble, Medical Biomaterials, NPTEL Course Material Department of BioEngineering, IIT Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102106057/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

56 
 



Title Computer Integrated Manufacturing Number  MEL6XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite ----   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Understand the effect of manufacturing automation strategies and derive production metrics 
2. Analyze automated flow lines and assembly systems, and balance the line. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Design automated material handling and storage systems for a typical production system 
2. Design a manufacturing cell and cellular manufacturing system 
3. Develop CAPP systems for rotational and prismatic parts. 
 
Contents 
Manufacturing Automation [4 Lectures]: Automated Manufacturing Systems, Computerized Manufacturing 
Support Systems, Reasons for Automation, Automation Strategies-The USA Principle  
Automated Flow lines [4 Lectures]: System Configurations, Workpart Transfer Mechanisms, Storage Buffers, 
Control of Production Line, Analysis of Transfer Lines-Transfer Lines with No Internal Parts Storage  
Manual Assembly Lines [4 Lectures]: Assembly Workstations, Work Transport Systems, Line Pacing, Coping 
With Product Variety, Analysis of Single Model Assembly Lines-Repositioning Losses, The Line Balancing 
Problem, Line Balancing Algorithms-Largest Candiate Rule, Kilbridge and Wester Method, Ranked Positional 
Weights Method  
Automated Assembly Systems [4 Lectures]: System Configurations, Parts Delivery at Workstations, Applications, 
Quantitative Analysis of Assembly Systems- Parts Delivery System at Workstations, Multi-station Assembly 
machines, Single Station Assembly Machines, Partial Automation  
Automatic Material Handling and Storage systems [4 Lectures]: Design Considerations in Material Handling, 
Material Transport Equipment-Industrial Trucks, Automated Guided Vehicles, Monorails and Other Rail-
Guided Vehicles, Conveyors, Cranes and Hoists, Analysis of Vehicle Based Systems, Conveyor Analysis. 
Automated Storage/Retrieval Systems, Carousel Storage Systems  
Automated Inspection systems [4 Lectures]: Overview of Automated Identification Methods, Bar Code 
Technology, Radio Frequency Identification, Other AIDC Technologies-Mangnetic Stripes, Optical Character 
Recognition, and Machine Vision  
Cellular Manufacturing Systems [4 Lectures]: Part Families, Parts Classification and Coding, Features of Parts 
Classification and Coding Systems, Opitz of Parts Classification and Coding Systems, Production Flow 
Analysis, Composite Part Concept, Machine Cell Design, Quantitative analysis of Cellular Manufacturing, 
Grouping of parts and Machines by Rank Order Clustering, Arranging Machines in a GT Cell  
Flexible Manufacturing Systems [4 Lectures]: Flexibility, Types Of FMS-A Dedicated FMS, A Random Order FMS, 
FMS Components-Workstations, Material Handling and Storage Systems, Computer Control System, Human 
Recourses, FMS Applications and Benefits  
Agile Manufacturing and Lean Manufacturing [2 Lectures] 
 
 
Text Book: 
1. Groover M. P., (2007), Automation, production Systems and Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 3 rd Edition, 

Prentice Hall Inc., New Delhi.  
2. Singh N., (2006), System Approach to Computer Integrated Manufacturing, Wiley & Sons Inc. 
3. Kusiak A, (2002),  Intelligent Manufacturing System, Prentice Hall Inc., New Jersey.  
 
Self-Learning Material  
J Ramkumar, Computer Integrated Manufacturing, NPTEL Course Department of Mechanical Engineering, 
IIT Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112104289/ 

 
 

57 
 



Title Design for Manufacturing  Number MEL6XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P[C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Program Elective 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Demonstrate the importance of integrating design and manufacturing to optimize production cost, quality 

and flexibility 
2. Discuss topics related to design for quality and reliability along with approaches towards robust design 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand the impact of manufacturing constraints on product design and process planning 
2.  Understand factors controlling production rate and influence the quality, cost and flexibility of 

manufacturing processes and systems. 
 

Contents  
Introduction [4 Lectures]: Need identification and problem definition, Concept generation and evaluation, 
embodiment design  
Selection of Materials and Shapes [8 Lectures]: Properties of engineering materials, Selection of materials (with 
examples and case studies), selection of shapes, Co-selection of materials and shapes. 
Selection of Manufacturing processes [8 Lectures]: Overview of manufacturing processes, Design for Casting, Design 
for bulk deformation and sheet metal processes,  

Processing of polymer [8 Lecture]: Design for Machining, Design for Polymer and powder processing, Case 
studies.  

Design for Assembly [8 lectures]: Review of Assembly operations, Design for Welding, Soldering, Brazing and 
Adhesive joining, Design for heat treatment, Case Studies  

Design for Reliability and Quality [6 Lectures]: Failure Mode and Effect Analysis, Design for Quality, Design for 
Reliability, Approach to robust design, Design for optimization 

 
Reference Books: 
1. Dieter G., Engineering Design - a materials and processing approach, McGraw Hill  
2. Ashby M. F., Material Selection in Mechanical Design, Butterworth-Heinemann 
3. Boothroyd G., Dewhurst P., and Knight W., Product Design for Manufacture and Assembly, John Wiley 
4. Bralla J. G., Handbook for Product Design for Manufacture, McGraw Hill  
 
Online Course Material: 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/107103012/ 
2. https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mechanical-engineering/2-008-design-and-manufacturing-ii-spring-2004/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

58 
 



Title Casting and Allied Processes Number  MEL4XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite ----   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Impart fundamental understanding of various casting processes.  
2. Discuss fundamentals of solidification, design principles, melting techniques etc. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Appreciate various casting processes and its selection for different materials 
2. Design systems and components necessary for obtaining cast components. 

 
Contents  
Casting Processes [8 Lectures]: classification, characteristics of sand casting processes, metal mould casting 
processes and casting processes using other mould/core materials, Pattern materials, types of patterns, Mould 
and core making materials and their characteristics  
Technology of Selected Casting Processes [6 Lectures]: clay bonded, oil bonded, synthetic resin bonded, and 
inorganic material bonded mould and core making processes. Sand additives and mould coatings. Metal 
mould casting processes, centrifugal and continuous casting processes  
Casting for heterogeneous materials [6 Lectures]: FRP, quick casting , full mould casting, evaporative pattern 
casting  
Solidification [7 Lectures]: Nucleation and grain growth, Solidification of pure metals, short and long freezing 
range alloys. Rate of solidification, Solidification contraction. 
Microstructure study and testing [5 Lecture]: macrostructure and microstructure Fluidity and its measurement. 
Mould-metal interface reactions. 
Design of the casting system [4 Lecture]: Gating and Risering design & analysis. 
Melting and quality control of various steels and non-ferrous alloys [6 Lectures]: Casting defects - fettling, inspection 
and testing of castings  
 
Reference Books:  
1. Serope Kalpakjian, (1997), Manufacturing processes for Engineering Materials, Addison Wesley. 
2. Mukherjee, P. C.  Fundamentals of metal casting technology, Oxford and IBH.  
3. Dieter G, Mechanical Metallurgy, Me Graw Hill, Kogakusha  
4. Korolkove, V.Casting properties of metals and alloys 
 
Self-Learning Material  
P K Jha, Principles of Metal Casting, NPTEL Course Material Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT 
Roorkee https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112107215/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

59 
 



 

Title Non-Traditional Machining  Processes  Number  MEL4XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program Elective 
(PE) 

Prerequisite ----   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Discuss the fundamentals of non-conventional machining processes. 
2. Appreciate the effect of process parameters on quality of machined components 

 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Students will learn new class of machining techniques used in industries 
2. Students will learn about process parameters involved in non-traditional techniques and their effects on 

process performance 
3. Students will be aware of distinct class of materials along with their industrial applications 

Contents 
Introduction [2 Lectures]: Technological and commercial need, classification, performance constraints, selection 
of NTM, advanced processes  
Mechanical Machining Process [7 Lectures]: Abrasive jet machining, water jet cutting, abrasive water jet 
machining, abrasive flow machining, magnetic abrasive finishing - process variables, material removal rate, 
mechanism of material removal, process capabilities, abrasive particle size, limitations and applications.  
Ultrasonic Machining [4 Lectures]: Ultrasonic machining system, mechanics of cutting, process parameters, 
analysis, capability, grain growing model, grain hammering model, applications and limitations.  
Electro Discharge Machining (Edm) [7 Lectures]: Working principle, process parameters, process capabilities, 
components of system and its functions, analysis of RC circuit, power delivered to discharging circuit, current 
in discharge circuit, parametric relation for material removal rate and surface finish, gap cleaning, process 
characteristics, effect of various parameters on material removal rate, application and limitations,, wire EDM 
machine, stratified wire, process characteristics, applications and limitations.  
Laser Beam Machining (LBM) [4 Lectures]: Production of lasers, types of lasers, process characteristics, working 
principle, process parameters, process capabilities, components of system and its functions, limitations, 
application in drilling, cutting, marking and miscellaneous applications.  
Plasma Arc Machining (PAM) [4 Lectures]: Working principle, process parameters, process capabilities, elements 
of PAM system and their functions, various plasma arc torches, process capabilities, comparison with oxy fuel 
cutting, applications and limitations.  
Electron Beam Machining (EBM) [2 Lectures]: Working principle, process parameters, process capabilities, 
elements of EBM system and their functions, applications and limitations.  
Introduction to ElectroChemical And Chemical Machining Processes [2 Lectures]: Working principle components and 
functions, process parameters, limitations and applications. 
Mechanism of MRR [3 Lectures]: Electro chemical machining, material removal rate and mechanism. 
Parametric study [7 Lectures]: inter electrode gap, zero feed rate, finite feed rate, maximum permissible feed rate, 
self-regulation feature, effect of Joule’s heating, effect of hydrogen bubbles generation, anode shape prediction. 
Application, Advantages and limitations [2 Lectures]: Tool design - Chemical machining, masks, etchants, 
advantages and limitations.  
 
Text Book 
1. Jain V K, (2012),  Advanced Machining Processes, Allied Publications Private Limited.  
2. McGeough J A, (2011), Advanced Methods of Machining, Springer.  
3. Benedict G F, (2011), Non Traditional Manufacturing Process, Taylor and Francis.  

 
Reference Books 
1. Pandey P C and Shan H S, (2011), Modern Machining Process, Tata McGraw Hill Publications.  
2. Ghosh A and Mallik A K, (2006), Manufacturing Science, East West Press Private Limited.  
3. Abdel H and El-Hofy G, (2005), Advanced Machining Processes, McGraw Hill Publications.  

60 
 



4. Sommer C, (2000), Non-traditional Machining Handbook, Advance Publishing Inc. 
 

Self-Learning Material  
V K Jain, Advanced Machining Processes, NPTEL Course Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112104028/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

61 
 



Title Welding Science and Technology  Number  MEL4XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 

Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite ----   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Impart fundamental understanding of various conventional and non-conventional welding processes 
2. Discuss various metallurgical aspects related with welding 
3. Discuss heat transfer and associated issues with the welding operation 

 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Appreciate the physics of welding operation and allied processes and select the process 
2. Model heat transfer and cooling characteristics of welding 

 
Contents 
Introduction and classification of welding [7 Lectures]: Design principles of welded structures; Physics of welding 
arc – characteristics of arc, mode of metal transfer, forces acting on a molten droplet.  
Shielded metal arc welding, Submerged arc welding (SAW) [3 Lecture]:Gas tungsten arc welding, Gas metal arc 
welding, 
Arc welding [6 Lectures]:Flux cored arc welding, Plasma arc welding, Electroslag welding, Electrogas welding, 
Arc stud welding, Synergic and pulsed welding. 
 Diffusion welding [2 Lecture]. 
Friction welding, resistance welding, brazing, soldering [8 Lectures]: 
Power source [4 Lecture]: Types of power source and their characteristics. 
Flux and coating [4 Lecture]: Welding fluxes and coatings - type and classification. 
Welding thermal cycle [2 Lecture]: Cooling rates, models for welding heat sources. 
Testing of the welded joint [4 Lecture]:  Non-destructive Testing of welds, fracture and fatigue of welded 
structures. 
Role of heat treatment and alloying elements on performance [4 Lecture]:  Welding metallurgy, heat treatment of 
welds, effect of alloying materials. 
Welding symbol for process and position [2 Lecture]:  Welding symbols, standards and codes.  
Laboratory Classes (12 Classes) 
Study of temperature distribution during weld thermal cycle. 
Study of residual deformation in arc welded joint. 
Distortion study for the welded joint. 
Effect of the welding parameters on bead profile. 
Study on effect of welding parameters on mechanical performance of the welded joint. 
Study of the heat input on microstructure of bulk weld metal and HAZ. 
Non-destructive testing of the welded joint (Liquid penetrant testing). 
 
Text book 
1. Brien, O., (2004), Welding Handbook: Welding Processes, Part 1, Vol. 2, AWS. 
2. Lancaster J. F., (1986), The Physics of welding, Pergamon,. 
3. Messler, R. W., (1999), Principles of Welding, John Wiley and Sons. 

 
Reference book 
1. Grong O., (1997), Metallurgical modelling of welding, 2nd Ed, IOM Publication. 
2. Radhakrishnan V M, (2002), Welding technology and design, New age.  
3. Goldak A, (2005), Computational welding mechanics, Springer.  
4. Lindgren L E, (2007),  Computational welding mechanics, Woodhead Publishing Limited.  
 
Self-Learning Material  
G Phanikumar, Analysis and Modeling of Welding, NPTEL Course Material Department of Metallurgical 
Engineering, IIT Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106067/ 

62 
 



Title Welding Metallurgy Course No. MEL6XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P[C] 3-0-0[3] 

Offered for B. Tech (ME) Type Program Elective 

Pre-requisite  

Objectives 
To provide students understanding of the metallurgical principles involved in welding of ferrous and non-
ferrous metals and alloys and to provide knowledge on dissimilar metal welding. 
 
Learning Outcomes   
1. To enable understanding and effective application of physical metallurgy principles to non-equilibrium 

thermo-mechanical conditions associated with welding. 
2. Facilitate understanding and familiarity of the joining of dissimilar metal welds. 
3. Understanding of the basic fundamentals, techniques and processes suitable for welding non-ferrous 

alloys. 
 
Course Content 
Metallurgy principles for welding [6 Lectures]: Application of physical metallurgy principles to non-equilibrium 
thermo-mechanical conditions associated with welding. 
 
Heat and Fluid Flow in Welding [10 Lectures]: 
Fluid flow in welding [5 Lecture]: fluid flow at flow in welding, Fluid flow and metal evaporation in welding. 
Chemical reaction during the welding process [5 Lecture].  
 
Fusion zone [12 Lectures]: 
Various zones of the welded joint [6 Lecture]: Fusion zone, Partially melted zone, Heat affected zone. 
Solidification and cracking in welds [6 Lecture]:  Weld solidification principles, Chemical Inhomogeneities and 
cracking.  
 
Welding of various materials [12 Lectures]:  
Welding of similar alloys [6 Lecture]: Welding of stainless steels, aluminum alloys, copper alloys and Nickel 
alloys. 
Joining of Dissimilar metal welds [6 Lectures]: Ni/Cu with SS; different grade steels. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Sindo Kuo, (2002), Welding Metallurgy, Second Edition, Wiley 
2. Easterling K.E., (1992), Introduction to the physical metallurgy of welding,  Butterworths 
3. Lippold J. C. and Kotecki D. J., (2005), Welding Metallurgy and Weldability of Stainless steels, Wiley  

Self Learning Material  
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106082/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

63 
 



Course Title Fundamentals of Metal Forming Number MEL6XXX 
Technology 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3-0-0-0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Programme Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite    

Objectives 
1. To impart the basic knowledge and concepts used in the area of metal forming technology. 
2. To understand the science and technology of different forming processes and analyze forming problems -   

both the mechanics of forming processes and how the properties of metals interact with the processes. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. The course will enable the students to be conversant with working principles so that they can use the 

knowledge gained towards increasing the productivity of manufacturing industries in the long run. 
2. Enabling the students to understand the fundamentals of the formability of materials.  
 
Contents 
Introduction [4 Lectures]: Introduction to metal forming technology; Classification of metal forming processes; 
Cold, warm and hot working; Mechanical behavior of materials. 
Mechanical properties of materials [5 Lectures]: Concepts of stress-strain; State of stress in three-dimension; 
Elastic and plastic stress-strain relationships; Tensile properties; Flow stress and flow curves.   
Theory of plasticity[5 Lectures]: Introduction to the theory of plasticity; Yield criteria; Strain, strain rate and 
temperature effects on flow properties; Microstructure variable and residual stresses.  
Bulk forming processes [6 Lectures]:  Introduction and classification of forging, rolling, extrusion, wire and tube 
drawing processes; Defects in rolled and forged products. 
Analysis of bulk forming processes [5 Lectures]:Analysis of forming processes by Slab method, Slipline field 
method, Upper and lower bound methods. 
 Factors affecting metal working [2 Lectures]: Friction and lubrication in metal working; Metallurgical 
parameters affecting metal working processes. 
Sheet metal forming processes [4 Lectures]: Shearing, Punching/Blanking, Bending &Deep drawing, Stretch 
forming, etc.  
Formability [5 Lectures]: Formability testing of sheet metals; Determination of forming limit diagrams (FLD) 
and their applications; Defects in sheet metal forming; Case studies on the evolution of stress-strain during 
the forming processes.  
Special metal forming processes [6 Lectures]: High-energy rate forming such as explosive, electrohydraulic and 
magnetic forming processes; Powder metallurgy forming; Pilgering, Semi-solid forming, Forming by severe 
plastic deformation (SPD) processes; Hot isostatic pressing (HIP).  
 
Text Books 
1. Ghosh A. and Mallik A.K., Manufacturing Science, Pearson India, 2010. 
2. Altan T. and Tekkaya A.E., Sheet Metal Forming: Processes and Applications, ASM International, 2012. 
3. Harris J.N., Mechanical Working of Metals ‐ Theory and Practice, Pergamon 1983. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Rowe G.W., An introduction to the Principles of Metalworking, Edward Arnold, 1968. 
2. Dieter G.E., Mechanical Metallurgy (Third edition), McGraw Hill Education, 2017. 
Self-Learning Material  
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/107/112107250/ 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/106/112106153/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

64 
 



Title Introduction to Acoustics Number ME4XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Program Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite Linear Algebra and Calculus    

Objectives  
This course aims to provide fundamental concepts of acoustics involving sound propagation, sound 
generation, sound radiation, sound reflection and transmission, and sound reception, and use of these concepts 
for studying and development of noise control methods 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand characteristics of acoustic field for different scenarios like in a room, in a muffler, in a duct, in 

free field etc. 
2. Identify different noise sources in a system and then, work to develop methods to reduce the noise. 
 
Contents  
Introduction and terminology used in acoustics [1 Lecture]  
Acoustic wave equation and its simple solutions [4 Lectures] 
Spherical waves [3 Lectures]: Inhomogeneous acoustic wave equation, concept of point source 
Reflection and transmission [5 Lectures]: Plane waves under normal and oblique incidence, Sound transmission 
through a fluid layer and a thin panel  
Radiation [5 Lectures]: Sound field of oscillating spheres (as elemental sources), Sound field due to monopole, 
dipole and quadrupole sources, their importance, and their relation with oscillating spheres, sound field from 
a plane circular piston, continuous line source, radiation impedance, directivity and directivity index  
Acoustic field in a rectangular waveguide of constant cross section [3 Lectures] 
Pipes, resonators and filters [4 Lectures]: Resonance in pipes, power radiation from open ended pipes, Helmholtz 
resonator, Mufflers, Acoustic barriers and enclosures  
Sound absorption [5 Lectures]: A simple model for growth of sound in a room, Reverberation Time, Sound 
absorption and Sound absorption materials, direct and reverberant sound  
Electro-mechanical-acoustic analogies [4 Lectures]: Lumped parameter modeling of a loudspeaker using these 
analogies  
Hearing [2 Lectures]: Anatomy of human ear and function of different parts, Fundamental properties of hearing 
Noise and sound measurement [3 Lectures]: Introduction to sound measurement and instrumentation, frequency 
analysis, octave analysis, Combining band levels, Loudness level and loudness, Pitch and frequency  
Green’s function and Kirchoff’s formula [3 Lectures]: Introduction to generalized functions and Green’s theory for 
solution of partial differential equations, as required in acoustics, Reciprocal theorem in linear acoustics, 
Kirchhoff’s formula of linear acoustics in the presence of surfaces. 
 
Textbook 
1. Kinsler L. E., Frey A. R., Coppens A. B., Sanders J. V., (1999), Fundamentals of Acoustics, 4th Edition, Wiley 
2. Beranek L., Mellow T. (2019), Acoustics: Sound Fields, Transducers and Vibration, 2nd Edition, Academic Press 
3. Migeot J. L., Coyette J. P., Lielens G., (2016), Acoustics: Essential concepts, theory and models of linear acoustics 

for engineers, 1st Edition, IJK Numerics  
4.  Munjal M. L., (2013), Noise and Vibration Control, World Scientific Publishing Pte. Ltd. 
5.  Dowling and Ffowcs-Williams, (1983), Sound and sources of sound, Ellis Horwood Publishers. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112106225/ 
2.   https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112104026/ 
3.   http://teachingexcellence.mit.edu/category/inspiring-teachers/amar-g-bose-6-312-acoustics 

 
 
 
 
 

65 
 



Title Computer Aided Design Number ME4XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–2 [4] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Program 
Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite Linear Algebra and Calculus   

Objectives  
To introduce the concepts of geometric modelling and its use in Computer Aided Design 
 
Learning Outcomes: 
1. Understanding fundamentals of geometric modelling techniques 
2. Understand the application of geometric modelling and CAD techniques in creation of product desi  
 
Contents  
Transformations [6 Lectures]: 2D transformations, 3D transformations, Projections  
Analytical Curves [2 Lectures]: Circle, Ellipse, Parabola, Hyperbola, General quadratic curve  
Synthetic Curves [4 Lectures]:Cubic Curves (Hermite), Parabolically blended Curves, Bezier curves, B-spline 
Curves, NURBS [4 Lectures] 
Surfaces [3 Lectures]: Surface of revolution, Sweep Surfaces, Quadratic Surfaces, Spherical Surfaces 
 Surfaces [6 Lectures]: Coon's linear and bicubic patches, Ruled and Developable Surfaces, Bezier Surfaces, B-
spline Surfaces, Rational Surfaces  
Curve and Surface intersections and relational properties [4 Lectures] 
Solid Modelling [6 Lectures]: B-rep, CSG, Analytical solid modelling, Octree and Voxel representation, Euler's 
operators, Euler's formula, Euler-Poincare characteristics, Topology and Geometry  
Optimum Design [4 Lectures]: Purpose and applications of optimum design, effect of manufacturing errors; 
Characteristics of mechanical systems; Selection of optimum configuration; Critical regions; Materials and 
dimensions; Primary and subsidiary design equations; Limit equations; Normal redundant and incompatible 
specifications;   
Design techniques [3 Lectures]: Exact and iterative techniques. Optimal design of elements and systems; shafts, 
beams, gears, bearings, springs, high speed machinery, cams, intermittent motion devices. 
 
Laboratory Classes [12-13 Classes] 
Rotation of a 2D object about any arbitrary point (m, n) using 2D transformations , Reflection of a 2D object 
about any arbitrary line using 2D transformations, Rotation of a 3D object about any arbitrary line using 3D 
transformations, Reflection of a 3D object about any arbitrary plane using 3D transformations, Program for 
Oblique projection (Verify with cube with cut section), Program for Perspective projection (Verify with cube 
or cube with cut section), Program for translating the object, rotating the object and then performing 
perspective projection, program to find curve values { x(t), y(t), z(t) } for normalised cubic splines when initial 
and final points of the curve and tangents at initial and final points are given, Plot Bezier basis function or 
Bernstein basis functions or blending function for Bezier curves of various degree, MATLAB code to plot B-
spline basis functions and B-spline curves. The code should facilitate choice of knot vector: Uniform knot 
vector, open uniform knot vector, non-uniform knot vector, non-uniform knot vector proportional to chord 
distances, MATLAB code to plot rational B-spline basis functions and rational B-spline curves, MATLAB code 
for generating Bezier Surfaces, MATLAB code for generating B-spline surfaces, MATLAB code for generating 
rational B-spline surface 

Textbook 
1. Rogers D.F, and Adams J. A., Mathematical elements of Computer Graphics, McGraw Hill 
2.  Mortenson M. (2006), Geometric modelling, Industrial Press 
3.  Zeid, I., and Sivasubramanian, R., Theory and Practice CAD/CAM, McGraw Hill 
4. Johnson,‘Optimum Design of Mechanical Element’, John Wiley and Sons, 1961.  
5. Johnson, ‘Mechanical Design Synthesis’, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1970.  
6. Fox, ‘Optimization Methods for Engineering Design’, Addison-Wesley, 1971. 
 

66 
 



Self-Learning Material: 
1. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/106108056/ 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112104031/ 
3. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112102101/ 

 
  

67 
 



Title Principle of Biomechanics Number ME4XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–0[3] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME, BS & BE) Type Programme 
Elective(PC) 

Prerequisite Engineering mechanics, linear   
algebra, differential equations, and 
mechanics of materials 

Objectives  
1. To provide basic background in biomechanics for engineering students to understand the overview of 

musculoskeletal anatomy, mechanical and structural behavior of biological organs 
2. To analysis the forces in human function and movement; energy and power in human activity 
3. To apply the concept of stress and strain analysis in biological tissues and organs 
4. To explore the concept of viscoelasticity in modeling of biological organs 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Ability to identify a given bone, ligament or muscle by name, anatomic location, or function 
2. Ability to demonstrate the basic principles of mechanics to the analysis of human movement 
3. Ability to analyze the forces at a skeletal joint for various static and dynamic human activities 
4. Ability to calculate the stresses and strains in biological tissues given the loading conditions and material 

properties 
5. Ability to identify the appropriate viscoelasticity model for the mechanical behavior of a given biological 

tissue.  
 
Contents 
Basic Terminologies [5 Lectures ]: Skeletal System, Axial and Appendicular Skeleton, Bones in Human Body, 
Types of Joints, Movements about Joints, Levers in the Human Body 
Principle of Statics and its application of Musculoskeletal System [5 Lectures]: Joint structures and function, Joint 
Forces and Moments, Muscle Forces, Structural Function/Analysis of Skeletal Body Element (Shoulder, Elbow 
And Forearm, Wrist And Hand, Trunk And Spine, Hip, Knee, Ankle, Patterns Of Movement 
Review of Dynamics and its applications [ 5 Lectures]: Linear And Angular Kinematics of Human Motion, Kinetic 
of Human Motion, Examples In Biomechanics; Applications of Human Motion Analysis In Fluid Medium 
Stress And Strain In Tissue [5 Lectures]: Bone, Tendon and Ligament, Muscle, Articular Cartilage, Hookian 
Constitutive Law ( Homogeneous/Non Homogeneous, Isotropic/Anisotropic),  
Linear/Nonlinear Behavior of Tissues and its degradation [7 Lectures]: Tensile, Compressive, And Shear Properties 
of Connective Tissues, Mechanical Properties of Bones, Degradation of Tissue 
Anisotropic Behavior of Bone [5 Lectures]: Response Of Tissue to Different Loading Conditions (Overload Injuries 
And Conditioning),  
Introduction to Viscoelasticity [Lecture 5]: Viscoelasticity of Soft Tissues, Models of Viscoelasticity (Maxwell, 
Voigt, Kelvin),  
Viscoelastic Behavior of Tissues[Lecture 5]: Viscoelastic Behavior of Tendons, Tendon Interaction with 
Surrounding Tissues, Mechanical Properties of Muscles   

 
Textbooks 
1. Hall, S. J, Basic biomechanics.  
2. Ozkaya and Nordin,  Fundamentals of biomechanics: equilibrium, motion, and deformation. 
3. Mow And Hayes, Basic orthopedic biomechanics 
4. Nordin & Frankel, Basic biomechanics of the musculoskeletal system 
5. Duane Keaton, ‘Fundamentals of Biomechanics’, 2nd Ed, Springer, 2007 
Reference Books  
1. Fung, Biomechanics: mechanical properties of living tissues 
2. Winter, Biomechanics and control of human movement 

 
 
 
 

68 
 



Title Mechanical Vibrations Number ME4XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech. (ME)  Type Program Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the fundamentals of vibration of discrete systems, influence of damping 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Analyse the vibration characteristics of discrete systems  
2.  Thorough understanding of modeling of damping and their effects on system response 
 
Contents  
Introduction [1 Lecture] 
Single degree of freedom systems [5 Lectures]: Undamped free and forced vibration  
Types of damping [2 Lectures]: Viscous, Friction, Hysteretic damping  
Damped single degree of freedom [2 Lectures]: Frequency response, resonance  
Beating phenomenon [1 Lecture] 
Vibration under general forcing condition, Duhamel Integral [4 Lectures] 
Vibration measuring instruments  [4 Lectures] 
Response spectrum or Shock spectrum [4 Lectures] 
Two-degrees of freedom system [5 Lectures] 
Multi degree of freedom systems [5 Lectures] 
Free vibration of undamped systems [3 Lectures]: Normal modes ,Orthogonality of modes, Expansion theorem, 
Modal analysis  
Vibration control [3 Lectures]: Vibration isolation, vibration absorber  
String  and beam vibration [2 Lectures] 
Vibration of rotating shafts and critical speeds [1 lecture] 
 
Textbook   
1. Thompson, W.T., (1993), Theory of Vibration with Applications, Prentice Hall 
2. Rao, S.S., (1990), Mechanical Vibrations, Prentice Hall 
3. Meirovitch, L., (1986), Elements of vibration analysis,, Prentice Hall 
4. Weaver, Timoshenko and Young, ‘Vibration Problems in Engineering’, 5th Ed. John-Wiley and Sons, 1990.  
5. Clough and Penzien, ‘Dynamics of Structures’, 2nd Ed. McGraw-Hill,1993. 
Online Course Material  
nptel.ac.in/courses/112103112/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

69 
 



Title Introduction to Robotics  Number RM4XX0 

Department/ Robotics and Mobility Systems  L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
IDRP   

Offered for B. Tech (All Branches) Type Specialization 
Core 

Prerequisite  

Objectives 
1.To introduce fundamental aspects of modelling and control of robot manipulators. 
2.To provide a brief of results from geometry, kinematics, dynamics, motion planning and control 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The course will equip students with theoretical and practical knowledge of robot modelling, programming and 

control. 
 
Contents 
Part I: Robot Modelling [14 Lectures] 
Position Kinematics [6 lectures]: Transformations, Rigid Motions, Forward Kinematics: Denavit-Hartenberg 
Convention, Inverse Kinematics  
Velocity Kinematics [4 lectures]: The Jacobian: Angular and Linear Velocity: Singularities, Accelerations  
Robot Dynamics [4 lectures]: Equations of Motion, Kinetic and Potential Energy, Euler-Lagrange Equations, 
Recursive Newton-Euler Formulation  
Part II: Motion Planning and Vision based control [14 Lectures] 
Path Planning [3 lectures]: The Configuration Space, Planning in Configuration Space, Potential Fields, RRTs  
Trajectory Planning [5Lectures]: Point to Point Motion, Paths Specified by Via Points  
Computer Vision [3 lectures]: Introduction to Computer Vision, The Geometry of Image Formation, Camera 
Calibration, Image Features, Segmentation  
Vision-Based Control [3 lectures]: Relation between End Effector and Camera Motions, Camera Motion and 
Interaction Matrix, Image-Based Control Laws, Partitioned Approaches  
Part III: Robot Control [14 Lectures] 
Linear Control [6 lectures]: Feedback and closed-loop control, second-order linear systems, control of second-
order systems, Control-law partitioning, trajectory-following control, disturbance rejection, Continuous vs. 
Discrete time control, modelling and control of a single joint, architecture of an industrial-robot controller 
Nonlinear control [5 lectures]: Nonlinear and time-varying systems, multi-input, multi-output control systems, 
control of manipulators, practical considerations, Lyapunov stability analysis, cartesian-based control systems, 
adaptive control  
Force Control [3 lectures]: Interaction with Environment, Force Control, Hybrid Force/Motion control  
 
Text Books 
1.Craig J. J (2008), Introduction to robotics: mechanics and control. Pearson 3rd Edition. 
2.Spong M. W., Hutchinson, S., and Vidyasagar, M.(2020), Robot modeling and control. New York: Wiley 2nd 

Edition. 
3.Saha S. K. (2017), Introduction to robotics. Tata McGraw-Hill Education, 2nd edition 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1.https://see.stanford.edu/Course/CS223A 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70 
 



Title Mechatronics  Number ME6XX 

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 2–0–2–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Programme Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite Basic knowledge in Mechanisms   

Objectives  
1. Understanding basics of sensing and actuation (electrical, hydraulic and pneumatic with industrial 

applications). 
2. Inculcate system design thinking among students   
3. Impart Programming and interfacing techniques of embedded microcontrollers with sensors and actuators 

for internet of things applications in mechanical engineering 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Knowledge and understanding of Sensors, actuators and microcontrollers in the context of mechanisms 

and machines. 
2. Power management of systems through modern technologies and system integration and design 
3. IoT fundamentals and modern computing skills, and the role of programming within the mechanical 

engineering domain. 
 

Contents 
Introduction to Mechatronics systems [3 Lectures]: Mechatronics system components- Measurement Systems, 
Block diagram representation 
Types of systems [5 Lectures]: First order systems, second order systems, Performance specifications in time and 
frequency domain, Open and Closed Loop Systems, PID Control of mechanical Systems  
Introduction to sensors [5 lectures]:  Basics of analog and digital electronic devices, Principles and working of 
typical sensors such as Resistive, capacitive, inductive and resonant transducers, encoders, piezoelectric 
accelerometers and pressure sensors, ultrasonic flow meters, GPS sensor etc.   
Sampling rate selection for sensors [3 Lectures]: Signal to noise ratio, power requirements for wired and 
wireless sensors, Selection of D/A and A/D converters, quantization and measurement errors.  
Introduction to actuators [5 Lectures]: Classification of actuators:  Basic working principles of DC motors, Stepper 
Motors, Pulse width modulation, Hydraulic and pneumatic actuation, PLC based control of systems with 
solenoids and relays,  
Microcontrollers [3 Lectures]: Basics of Microcontrollers and Interrupts and Low Power Features, interfacing of 
sensors and actuators with microcontrollers.  
Internet of Things (IOT) [3 Lectures]: Fundamentals of IOT, basic communication Networks, Introduction to 
protocols such as Bluetooth Low Energy, ZigBee etc,  
Connecting Things to the Cloud [3 Lectures]: Review of IOT platforms, Hands-on project of a sensor based 
Weather Station. 
 
Laboratory Classes (12 Classes): 
1. Dissection and assembly of consumer appliances 
2. Programmable logic controller (PLC) and Pneumatic circuits 
3. Programmable logic controller for material handling system (conveyor belt) 
4. Quanser CUBE servo control design with QUARC real time interface 
5. Sensors and Internet of things project 
6. MATLAB SIMULINK simulations 
 
Reference Books  
1. Bolton, W., (2010), Mechatronics, 4th Edition, Addison Wesley  
2. R. Kamal (2017), Internet of things, Architecture and Design Principles, McGrawhill, First edition 
3. Fraden, J., (2004), Handbook of Modern Sensors Physics, Designs and Applications, 3rd Edition, Springer Verlag  
4. Histand & Aciatore, Introduction to mechatronics and measurement systems, McGraw Hill, 1999.  
5. Bradley, Dawson, Burd & Loader, ‘Mechatronics’, Chapman & Hall, 1993. 
Online sources: 

71 
 



1. NPTEL IIT Kharagpur: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105166/ 
2. Stanford:  https://online.stanford.edu/courses/xee100-introduction-internet-things 
3. https://www.coursera.org/specializations/iot (basic raspberry pi and Arduino) 
4. Curtin university Micromasters program in IOT. https://news.curtin.edu.au/media-releases/curtin-offer-

new-internet-things-micromasters/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

72 
 



Title Finite Element Methods and Applications Number ME6XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME and CI) Type Program 
Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite    

Objectives  
Understand the fundamental concepts and formulation of the finite element methods for solving differential 
equations arising in solid and fluid mechanics. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. The application of finite element algorithms for structural, fluid mechanics and thermal applications. 
2. Be able to formulate and solve basic problems in heat transfer, solid mechanics and fluid mechanics 
 
Contents  
Introduction [8 Lectures]: Basic concept of a finite element technique, Role of discretization, General procedure 
for finite element analysis, Assumed functions, Comparison between FEM solution and exact solution;   
Stiffness matrix,   spring  and bar elements;   Finite element formulation of axial rod and beam problems.  
Truss and Frame Structures [5 Lectures]: Stiffness Method  Introduction;   Element  Transformation;   Boundary 
conditions,   Constraint forces,   Global Stiffness  matrix;   Element strain and stress;   Three Dimensional 
Trusses and Frames 
Finite Element Formulation of Beam Elements [5 Lectures]: Introduction;   Elementary beam  theory;   Flexure 
element stiffness matrix;   Boundary conditions,   constraint  forces,   Global stiffness matrix;   General three 
dimensional beam element 
Method of Weighted Residuals and Interpolation Functions [6 Lectures]: Introduction;   Completeness and 
compatibility;   Concept of interpolation functions;   Polynomial  forms,   geometric isotropic;   Triangular,   
rectangular and three dimensional  elements;   Isoparametric formulation,   axisymmetric elements;   Numerical  
Integration:   Gaussian Quadrature.  
Finite Element Analysis for Plane Stress and Plane Strain Problems [8 Lectures]: Basic  Equations;   Boundary 
Conditions;   FEM Formulation;   Shape Functions;   Numerical  Evaluation of Elements Matrices and Vectors;   
Global matrices;   Boundary  conditions and solutions; Thin plate  formulation;   Various thin plate elements;  
Finite Element Analysis in Free and Forced Vibration Problems [5 Lectures]: Vibration of a rod;   Vibration of a beam;   
Classification of partial  differential equations;   Time response of parabolic equations;   Forced vibration  
problems 
Finite Element Analysis in Heat Transfer and Fluid Flows problems [5 Lectures) : Conduction, Convection and 
Radiation conditions, Incompressible flows, Navier-Stokes equations including heat transfer, Acoustic fluids 
coupled to structures, Navier-Stokes fluids coupled to structures 
 
Reference Books: 
1. R.  D.   Cook, (2008),   Concepts and Applications of Finite Element Analysis,   John Wiley & Sons.  
2. K.  J.   Bathe, (2002),   Finite Element Procedures in Engineering Analysis,   Prentice-Hall 
3. S.   Moaveni, (2008),   Finite Element Analysis,   Theory & Application with ANSYS,   2nd Edition,   Prentice 

Hall 
4. D Hutton, (2009),  Fundamental of Finite Element Analysis,   McGraw-Hill,  
5. J. N. Reddy,  (2005), An Introduction to the Finite Element Method, 3rd  edition , McGraw Hill Education;  
6. Zienkiewicz and Taylor, ‘Finite Element Method’, 4th Edition, McGraw-Hill, UK, 1989. 
Self-learning Materials: 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112104116/# 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/106/112106135/ 
3. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/104/112104115/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 

73 
 



Title Vehicle Dynamics Course No. ME6XX0 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P[PE] 3-0-0[3] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Program Elective 

Pre-requisite    

Objectives 
1. To cover the fundamentals of vehicle dynamics 
2. To appreciate the vehicle subsystem design issues 
 
Learning Outcomes   
1. To be able to model and simulate dynamics of vehicles 
2. To be able to analyze vehicle sub-systems 

Course Content 
Introduction [2 Lectures]: History, vehicle classifications, fundamental approaches to vehicle dynamics 
modelling, motion analysis, force analysis 
Acceleration Performance [6 Lectures]: Power train components; power-limited acceleration; traction limited 
acceleration; transverse weight shift; front wheel drive vs rear wheel drive vs. all-wheel drive vehicles; 
Braking Performance [6 Lectures]: Braking force analysis; brake design and analysis; federal regulation on braking 
performance; anti-lock braking system; wheel lock-up; tire/road friction; safety and maintenance issues in 
braking.  
Tire and Tire Dynamics [6 Lectures]: Tire specifications and constructions; tire motion analysis; tire force analysis; 
tire contact stress analysis;  
Ride [6 Lectures]: Riding comfort; perception of vibration; vibration sources; vibration transmission to the 
passengers; vibration models; vibration isolation techniques.  
Cornering/steering [6 Lectures]: Lower speed cornering; high speed corner; cornering bicycle model; steering 
angle; over-steering vs. under-steering;  
Chassis and Suspension Systems[6 Lectures]: General kinematics; vehicle constraint analysis; practical designs; 
 
Text Books: 
1. Thomas Gillespie, Fundamentals of Vehicle Dynamics,  SAE Publication. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Mike Blundell and Damian Harty , (2004),The Multibody systems Approach to Vehicle Dynamics, , Elsevier 
2. Vehicle Dynamics, (2009),  Theory and Application, Reza N. Jazar, Springer, 
3. Reimpell, Stoll and Betzler: The Automotive Chassis: Engineering Principles. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

74 
 



Title Experimental Modal Analysis Number ME6XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P-Th [C] 3–0–2–0 [4] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Programme Elective 
(PE) 

Prerequisite Linear algebra, calculus and   
Mechanical Vibrations 

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  To study theory and practice of experimental modal analysis for identification 
     of dynamic characteristics of structures 
2. To study application of experimental modal analysis results for assessing 
    structural dynamic behaviour 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand theory of experimental modal analysis (theory of modal analysis and signal processing 

techniques) 
2. Understand complete system and methods required for experimental modal analysis of any real life systems 

(practical system like car etc.) 
 
Contents  
Overview [1 Lecture]: introduction of modal analysis  
Theory of modal analysis [6 Lectures]: single degree of freedom (SDoF) system, Theory of modal analysis for 
undammed and damped multi degree of freedom (MDoF) system  
Signal Processing related to experimental modal analysis [5 Lectures]: Fourier Transform, Digital Fourier Transform, 
Aliasing, Windowing, Leakage  
Experimental Set-up for modal analysis [3 Lectures]: Excitation instruments, response measurements, types of 
excitation signals  
Modal parameter extraction [6 Lectures]: frequency domain methods, SDoF Methods and MDoF methods  
Modal parameter estimation [6 Lectures]: Time domain methods 
Model Validation [3 Lectures]: Modal scale factor, modal assurance criteria, mode phase collinearity and mode 
phase deviation 
Model Updating [4 Lectures]: Direct methods and Iterative methods  
Multi-input multi-output modal analysis methods [5 Lectures] 
Applications of EMA [3 Lectures]: structural dynamic modification, coupled structural analysis and response 
simulation 
 
Laboratory Experiments  
Obtaining modal parameters (natural frequencies and mode shapes) of a cantilever beam using impact hammer 
and accelerometer (Hammer roving and accelerometer roving case), Obtaining modal parameters (natural 
frequencies and mode shapes) of a simply supported plate using impact hammer and accelerometer (Hammer 
roving and accelerometer roving case), Obtaining modal parameters using Laser Doppler Vibrometer and 
impact hammer, Obtaining modal parameters (acoustic mode shapes) of rectangular cavity and a vibro-
acoustic rectangular cavity, Using modal parameters identified from experiment to update the models, Use of 
update model for desired structural dynamic modification of a cantilever beam 
 
Textbook  
1. Ewins, D. J., (1984), Modal testing: Theory and Practice, Research Studies Press Limited. 
2. Avitabile, P. (2017), Modal Testing: A Practitioner's Guide, John Wiley & Sons. 
3. Heylen, W., Lammens, S., Sas, P.(1998), Modal analysis theory and testing, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 

Faculty of Engineering, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Division of Production Engineering, 
Machine Design and Automation, 2nd edition. 

4. He, J. and Fu, Z. F. (2001), Modal Analysis, Butterworth-Heinemann 1st edition. 

 
 

75 
 



 

Title Techniques of  Noise Control Number ME6XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME, CI) Type Programme 
Elective (PE) 

Prerequisite Introduction to Acoustics   

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide background of feed forward and feedback control strategies for active control of sound 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Understand theory and application of single channel and multi-channel feed forward and feedback 
control strategies for active control of sound 
 
Contents  
Introduction to acoustics [2 Lectures] 
 
Frequency analysis [3 Lectures] 
 
Linear systems and digital filters (FIR and IIR Filters) [5 Lectures] 
 
Interference in plane wave sound fields [6 Lectures]: Sound fields in an infinite duct and enclosed fields, 
physical mechanisms behind active minimization of acoustic energy in enclosed sound fields  
 
Single channel feed forward control system [4 Lectures] 
 
Single channel feedback control system [4 Lectures] 
 
Global control of enclosed sound fields [6 Lectures] 
 
Local control of enclosed sound fields [4 Lectures] 
 
Multichannel feed forward control systems [4 Lectures] 
 
Active suppression of free field radiation by point sources [4 Lectures] 
 
Textbook  
1. Nelson, P. A., and Elliott, S. J. (1992). Active Control of Sound, Academic Press Limited, London. 
2. Hansen, C. H. (2001). Understanding active noise cancellation, Spon Press, Taylor & Francis Group, London & 

New York. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

76 
 



Title Nonlinear Oscillations and Chaos Number ME6XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME, CI, EE, PH, MA) Type Programme Elective 
(PE) 

Prerequisite Differential equations and linear algebra,    
Engineering Mechanics, Mechanical vibrations  

Objectives  
1. To provide the fundamental understanding about nonlinear phenomena and associated different types of 

responses  
2. To provide different types of solution techniques of nonlinear equations   
3. To provide basics of bifurcations and principle of stability  
4. To enable different numerical techniques to solve nonlinear equations  
5. To highlight various route to chaos phenomena and its significant in the stability analysis of physical 

systems 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. Understand fundamentals of nonlinear phenomena and associated different types of responses, Solution 

techniques of nonlinear equations and   
2. Understand different aspects of bifurcations and principle of stability  
3. Get an idea of various route to chaos phenomena and its significant in the stability analysis of physical 

systems 
 
Contents  
Introduction [8 Lectures]: linear and nonlinear systems, conservative and non-conservative systems; potential 
well, Phase planes, types of forces and responses; Local and global stability; Nonlinear phenomena.  
Nonlinear equation of motion [6 Lectures]: Linearization techniques, ordering techniques; Duffing equation, Van 
der Pol’s oscillator, Mathieu’s and Hill’s equations.  
Perturbation Solution techniques [6 Lectures]: Harmonic balance, Linstedt-Poincare’, Method of Multiple Scales, 
Averaging, incremental harmonic balance, modified Lindstedt Poincare’ techniques.  
Stability and bifurcation analysis [8 Lectures]: static and dynamic bifurcations, different routes to chaotic response 
crisis.  
Numerical techniques [8 Lectures]: time response, phase portrait, FFT, Poincare’ maps, point attractors, limit 
cycles and their numerical computation, strange attractors and chaos; Lyapunov exponents and their 
determination, basin of attraction, fractal dimension.  
Application [6 Lectures]: Single degree of freedom systems: Free vibration-Duffing’s oscillator; primary-, 
secondary-and multiple- resonances; Forced oscillations: Van der Pol’s oscillator; parametric excitation: 
Mathieu’s and Hill’s equations, Floquet theory; effects of damping and nonlinearity. Multi degree of freedom 
and continuous systems.  
 
Text Book 
1. Nayfeh, A. H., and Mook, D. T., Nonlinear Oscillations, Wiley-Interscience, 
2. Hayashi, C. (1964), Nonlinear Oscillations in Physical Systems, McGraw-Hill. 
3. Nayfeh, A. H., and Balachandran, B. (1995),  Applied Nonlinear Dynamics, Wiley. 
 
Reference books 
1. Evan-Ivanowski, R. M., (1976), Resonance Oscillations in Mechanical Systems, Elsevier.  
2. Seydel, R., (1988), From Equilibrium to Chaos: Practical Bifurcation and Stability Analysis, Elsevier. 
3. Moon, F. C., (1992), Chaotic & Fractal Dynamics: An Introduction for Applied Scientists and Engineers, Wiley. 
4. J. S., Advanced Theory of Vibration: Nonlinear Vibration and Onedimensional Structures, New Age 

International, 1992. 

 
 
 
 
 

77 
 



Title Micro-Nano Mechanics  Number ME 6XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME, EE) Type Programme Elective 
(PE) 

Prerequisite Mathematics, Basic Sciences, Engineering Mechanics,   
Mechanical vibration, and Structural mechanics  

Objective  
1. Provide the fundamentals of kinematics and kinetics of deformations of microsystem 
2. Highlights the interactions among thermal, electrical and mechanical effects in MEMS design  
 
Outcomes 
Students can able to 
1. Gain equivalent continuum mechanics to model nano-structures as sensors/actuators and energy 

harvester 
2. Develop MEMS/NEMS models and their solutions 

 
Contents  
Introduction [8 Lectures]: Kinematics of deformations (Deformation gradient, different strain tensors, strain-rate 
and rotation tensors, deformations of lines, surfaces and volumes); Kinetics of deformations; stress tensors; 
Coulomb force; Van der Waals force; Casimir force; Maxwell equations. 
Small-scale Mechanics[10 Lectures]: Lumped parameters micro-models; Micro-beams; Micro-plates; Governing 
equations; Boundary Conditions; Elctromechanical instability; Thermal effect in MEMS design; Inertia Forces 
and time-dependent voltage in MEMS design  
Nanomechanics [10 Lectures]:Equivalent continuum mechanics for nano structures; Nano-sensors; Nano-
composites; Size dependency; Nonlocal continuum mechanics  
 
Text Books: 
1. Elements of Continuum Mechanics, R. C. Batra, AIAA 
2. Fundamentals Of Continuum Mechanics, Stephen Bechtel &  Robert Lowe, ELSEVIER  
3. Nonlinear Differential Equations in Micro/nano Mechanics & Application in Micro/nano Structures and 

Electromechanical Systems, Ali Koochi & Mohamadreza Abadyan 

 
  

78 
 



Title Principle of Vibration Control  Number MT 7XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech (ME) Type Programme Elective 
(PE) 

Prerequisite Mathematics, Basic Sciences, Solid Mechanics,   
Mechanical vibration, and Structural mechanics  

Objective  
This course has been developed with the objective of providing a broad overview of different passive, active 
and semi-active vibration control strategies applied in Engineering fields. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students can able to gain enhanced understanding of the principles and earn the requisiteconfidence to address 
the new problems by themselves.   
 
Contents  
Introduction [5 Lectures]:Overview of mechanical vibration; methods and strategies of vibration control, 
Vibration reduction at sources; Affecting factors to vibration control 
Dynamics properties and selection of materials [5 Lectures]. Damping-stress relationships; selection of criteria of 
structural materials; Design for enhancing the damping capacity; Stress-strain relationship of viscoelastic 
material; Complex stiffness model; Viscoelastic laminate 
Dynamic Vibration Absorbers [6 Lectures]:Introduction; Dynamic Vibration Neutralizers; Self-tuned Pendulum 
Neutralizer; Optimum Design of Damped Absorbers; Auxiliary Mass with Damper; Gyroscopic Absorber; 
Impact Absorber; Absorbers attached to Continuous Systems; Stability analysis  
Vibration Isolations[5 Lectures]: Isolators with Complex Stiffness; Isolators with Coulomb Damping; Three 
Element Isolators; Two-stage Isolators; Velocity Shock and Shock force  
Active Vibration Control[6 Lectures]: Collocated and non-collocated control model; Lumped parameter models; 
State-space model; Distributed parameter models; Centralized and de-centralized control  
Vibration Damping and Absorption[5 Lectures]: Stability theorem of vibratory systems; Velocity, acceleration and 
position feedback control 
Actuators and Sensors[5 Lectures]: Electrodynamics actuators and sensors; Magnetostrictive materials, Smart 
fluids and actuators  
Piezoelectric Materials[5 Lectures]: Introduction; Electrically shunted piezoelectric materials; Piezoelectric 
actuators and sensors; Semi-active vibration control  
 
Text/reference books 
1. Principle of Passive and Active Vibration Control, Mallik and Chatterjee, 2014 
2. Mechanical Vibrations, S S Rao, 2012 
3. Vibration Control of Active Structures : An Introduction, A. Preumont,  Kluwer Academic 
4. Vibration with Control, D. J. Inman, Wiley 

 
  

79 
 



Title Mechanics of Soft Materials Number MT6XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech (ME, BS & BE) Type Programme Elective 
(PE) 

Prerequisite Mechanics of materials, Advanced mechanics of solids   

Objective  
The objective of the course is to provide an overview of the wide range of non-linear mechanical behaviours 
displayed by soft materials and tissues together with a basic understanding of their physical origin, to 
familiarize students with appropriate mathematical concepts for their modelling, and to illustrate the 
application of these concepts in different fields in mechanics. 

 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand fundamentals and mathematical concepts of modelling the nonlinear material behaviour.  
2. Get an idea of various failure modes of soft materials and safe design of soft material based systems. 

 
Contents  
Introduction [4 Lectures]:Introduction to soft materials: rubber-like materials, gels, soft biological tissues, etc. 
Mathematical preliminaries [4 Lectures]: Physical quantities and their classification; scalars, vectors, and tensors; 
index notation, vector products (dot, cross, and dyadic), representation of partial differentiation using comma 
symbol, gradient, divergence, curl of tensors and their representation using index notation. 
Non-linear continuum mechanics [5 Lectures]: Configurations and motion of continuum bodies, deformation 
gradient, strain tensors, stress and the balance principles:  
Conservation Equations [4 Lectures]: Conservation of mass, the momentum principles, the Cauchy stress tensor, 
stress measures for large deformations, the equations of motion and symmetry of stress, balance of mechanical 
energy, the principles of virtual work and power.  
Hyperelastic materials [4 Lectures]: General remarks on constitutive modeling, isotropic hyperelastic materials, 
incompressible hyperelastic materials, compressible hyperelastic materials,  
Different forms of strain energy density functions [5 Lectures]: neo-Hoboken, Mooney Rivlin, Ogden, Gent, Arruda 
Boyce models, etc. elasticity tensors, anisotropic hyperelastic materials, composite materials with one 
characteristic direction, materials with two characteristic directions, Fung’s model of biological tissue.  
Viscoelastic Materials [3 Lectures]: Coupling of elasticity and fluidity, kinematics, multiplicative decomposition 
of deformation gradient,  
Rheological models [5 Lectures]: concept of internal variables, dissipation inequality, constitutive equations, 
evolution equations, incompressibility.  
Applications [4 Lectures]:Homogeneous deformation of hyperelastic membranes under uniaxial and biaxial 
loading, balloon inflation, inflation of an artery under blood pressure, creep phenomena, 
Instabilities of soft materials [4 Lectures]: snap through instability, morphological instabilities: wrinkles, creases, 
folds, and ridges. dielectric actuators. 
 
Text/reference books 
1. A. Freed, Soft solids, Birkhauser Verlag Ag, 2016. 
2. K. Volokh, Mechanics of soft materials, Singapore, Springer, 2016. 
3. G.A. Holzapfel, Nonlinear Solid Mechanics - A continuum approach for engineering, 2000 
4. L.R.G. Treloar, The physics of rubber elasticity, 3rd ed., 2005 
5. P. Haupt, Continuum Mechanics and Theory of Materials, 2nd ed., 2002 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

80 
 



Title Product Design and Feasibility Number MT6XX 

Department Mechanical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech (ME, BS & BE) Type Programme Elective 
(PE) 

Prerequisite Mechanics of materials, Advanced mechanics of solids   

Objectives  
1. To provide understanding of need of a new product and product life cycle  
2. To inculcate basic steps of visualizing product development  
3. To enable understanding of user experience, product form, human factors, and marketplace realities. 

Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Enable to develop an engineering viewpoint for a specific product of societal use. 
2. Ability to design new products and processes 
3. Able to predict and assess the impact of specific products and their performance. 
 
Contents  
New Product [4 Lectures]:User-Centric Requirement, identifying customer needs, Need of a new product, 
concept generation, symbols, semantics, syntax and usability, product life cycle, steps towards a successful 
product. 
Design [7 Lectures]: Human use experience analysis, synthesis, sketching, analysis and selection of profitable 
products, basic engineering, concept generation, detailed design, prototype a physical product and/or 
service, product for an organization, product design and architecture. 
Characteristics of a Design[7 Lectures]: Applications in product design, Problem identification and selection, 
feasibility, viability, and human values towards a product, Analysis of functional Anatomy of function. 
Primary versus secondary versus tertiary/unnecessary functions, Functional analysis: Functional Analysis 
System Technique.  
Sketching [7 Lectures]: Sketching in 3D, Designing in 3D, hand sketch to digital rendering, quality function 
deployment, CAD based design and Ergonomics in product designs. 
Manufacture [8 Lectures]:Design for Manufacture and Assembly, design guidelines for different 
processes.  Ideation, Rapid prototyping and its application, design for manual assembly user testing, 
iteration, and storytelling. 
Materials [5 Lectures]: Durable products, non durable products, package designs, families of materials and 
processes in this areas, Product prototyping and manufacturing technologies; Creativity and innovation in 
product design. 
Specification and Final Product [5 Lectures]:- Product performance test; Cost models for product design, 
development and production; Marketing and product specification; Design protection and intellectual 
property rights.  
 
Text  Books 
1. Baxter, M.,,Product design : a practical guide to systematic methods of new product development, 

London: Chapman & Hall, 1996 
 

Reference Books 
1. M.M Andereasen, Integrated Product Development, IFS Publications Ltd. / SpringerVerlag, Berlin, 1987. 
2. Woodson, W. E. (1981). Human Factors Design Handbook. New York, McGraw-Hill Book Company. 
3. Norman, D. (1989). The Design of Everday Things. New York, Doubleday Currency 
4. Powell, D. (1985). Design Rendering Techniques. London, Orbis Publishing Limited 
5. Asimow Morris; Introduction to Design, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1962. 
6. Pulos, Arthur, The American Design Ethic, MIT, USA, 1983. 
7. Roozenburg and Eekels, Product Design: Fundamentals and Methods, Publisher: JohnWiley & Sons Inc; 

New Ed edition, 1995 
Self-learning Materials: 
Product Design and Development, IIT Roorkee, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/112/107/112107217/# 

 

81 
 



Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2nd year onwards B.Tech. Electrical 
Engineering Curriculum Structure 

AY 2020-21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 



1. Introduction 

The vision of the Department is to develop a world class teaching and research atmosphere by excelling in 
fundamental knowledge and applications of Electrical Engineering through curricular and co-curricular 
activities. In line with this vision, the department offers an undergraduate program to attract highly motivated 
students who are interested in cutting-edge technologies in the broad discipline of electrical engineering, and 
wish for a flexible program to consider a variety of career paths through capability-linked specializations of their 
choice. 
 
The program provides strong fundamentals in mathematics and science which develop analytical thinking and 
form the basis of the diverse tool set used by electrical engineers to innovate, design and develop the technology 
of the future. The engineering design component is integrated throughout the curriculum, motivating and 
familiarizing students with the real-world engineering challenges and equipping them with the essential technical 
skills for problem solving. The early strong theoretical foundations and hand-on exposure are supplemented by 
the core electrical engineering concepts ranging from circuit analysis and design, computing, control, 
communication, signal processing, and power engineering. Additional problem-solving skills and practical 
experience are developed through design projects and laboratory experiments.  
 
The curriculum offers flexibility to students for pursuing capability-linked specializations of their choice. The 
department specializations are designed to enable students to lead technological innovations addressing the 
emerging industrial and societal challenges in various domains of electrical engineering. The EE students can opt 
for any one of the departmental specializations in Cyber Physical Systems, Intelligent Communication and Networking, 
Communication Engineering, VLSI Systems, Visual Computing, Socio-Digital Reality, Nano and Flexible Electronics, 
Smart Grid, and Artificial Intelligence of Things. The in-depth understanding and technical skills acquired through 
these specializations will enable graduates to play a vital role in advancement of technologies such as 5G/6G 
communications, smart cities, smart healthcare, and Industry 4.0. 
 
Another distinct feature of the curriculum is provision for minors in Entrepreneurship or Management or 
interdisciplinary specializations in Smart Healthcare, Artificial Intelligence, and Robotics and Mobility Systems that 
allow students to pursue diverse career goals. Students will also have an opportunity to opt for a B. Tech. - 
Master’s dual degree in their chosen specialization or minor area. The curriculum also offers numerous options 
that enable students to gain industrial experience through collaborative industrial projects at industries and 
entrepreneurship experience at the Institute's incubation centre. 
 
 
2. Objectives of the program 

The program aims at imparting theoretical foundations and practical skills of electrical engineering discipline. It 
prepares graduates for three potential career paths: 
1. An industrial path to take up the role of a technical leader or a manager through life-long learning. 
2. An entrepreneurial path to apply the acquired knowledge to develop new products and initiate Deep Tech 

Start-up Company. 
3. An academic path to enter a top-tier graduate program to conduct cutting-edge research with broad 

applications, and eventually to pursue a research or academic profession. 
 
 
3. Expected Graduate Attributes 
 
Graduates of the UG program in EE are expected to have following attributes: 
1. Strong understanding of fundamentals of mathematics, science and engineering with emphasis on electrical 

technologies for Communication, Signal Processing, Devices & Circuits, Computing Systems, Control 
Engineering, and Power Engineering 

2. Ability to apply technical skills to identify, formulate, and solve complex problems encountered in modern 
electrical engineering practices.  

3. Ability to model, analyze, design and experimentally evaluate electrical components or systems that achieve 
desired technical specifications, subject to certain resource constraints. 

1 
 



4. Ability to compete effectively in a world of rapid technological advancements and assume leadership roles 
within academic, industrial, or entrepreneurial environments in the broad context of electrical engineering. 

5. Have established the foundations for critical thinking that are needed to broaden their careers in diverse 
disciplines through minor/ graduate-level studies and the process of life-long learning. 

6. Ability to recognize and practice professional ethics in working environment. 
7. Ability to acquire new knowledge and integrate it in the existing paradigm so as to create new innovative 

electrical systems for the current and future usage and apply it as needed. 
 
 
4. Learning Outcomes 
 
The graduates of EE UG program will be able: 
1. To acquire knowledge of electrical engineering principles along with the required understanding of 

computing, engineering fundamentals, mathematics, and science.  
2. To apply the concepts of mathematics, sciences and engineering (including computing science) to analyze and 

design complex electrical and electronic circuits and systems containing hardware and software modules. 
3. To gain in-depth understanding of concepts of Signals, Devices, Circuits, Systems, Machine Learning, 

Programming, Control, Communications, Hardware Design and related interdisciplinary topics. 
4. To create, select, and apply appropriate techniques, resources, electrical engineering design and computing 

tools to solve complex engineering problems with an understanding of the limitations through laboratory 
exercises and design projects. 

5. To perform literature review and patent landscaping for innovative research. 
6. To adapt to work in multidisciplinary environment. 
7. To understand professional ethics and social responsibilities. 
8. To develop technical presentation skills and communicate effectively. 
9. To engage in independent learning in the context of technological advancements. 
10. To conduct develop attitude for product design and entrepreneurial activities. 
 
 
5. New skill sets targeted 

EE students explore subjects critical to advancement in today’s needs — from circuit design and electronics to 
computing, control and communication, and machine learning. The acquired knowledge will be helpful in future 
technologies including:  

1. 5G and Beyond Communications 
2. Cyber Physical Systems 
3. Nano-electronics and Quantum Devices 
4. Smart Grid 

2 
 



6. Topic clouds and Mapping of Topic clouds with proposed courses 
 

Table 1. Topics and Mapping of Topic with Courses 
Area Category  Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 

Random Variables, Stochastic Processes, 
Probability, Statistics and 

Stationarity, Ergodicity, Discrete and 
Stochastic Processes (IE, MA) 

Continuous  Random Processes 
Signal and System Classification, LTI 
Systems Properties and Response,  Fourier, Signals and Systems (IE, EE) 

Core Laplace and z-Transform, Sampling  
EM Wave Propagation, Transmission Lines, Engineering Electromagnetics 
Waveguides and Antennas (PC) 
Modelling of Noise and Channels, Noise 

Communication Systems (PC) 
through LTI Systems, Modulation, Digital 

 
Baseband and Passband Transmissions,  
OSI Architecture, Source Coding, Error 
correction techniques, Queuing Theory, Data Communication Networks 
Switching Techniques, Controlled and (PC) 
Random Access, Routing, End-to-End  

Communi Reliability 
cation 

 Techniques Quantization, Discrete Fourier Transform, 
Digital Signal Processing (PC) 

Fast Fourier Transform, Circular 
 

Convolution, Multirate Signal Processing 
Source Coding, Channel Coding, Channel 

Information Theory and Coding 
Capacity Theorem, AWGN Channel 

(PE) 
Capacity, Multiuser Channel Capacity 

Cellular Communication 
Networks (PE) 

 Spread Spectrum 
 Communications (PE) 

Systems 5G and beyond Communications Satellite Communications (PE) 
 Microwave Engineering (PE) 
 Computer Networks (PE) 

Optical Communication 
Systems (PE) 

3 
 



EE UG – Communications Concentration Roadmap 

 

Area Category  Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 
Probability, Random Variables, Probability, Statistics and 
Concentration bounds, Linear Prediction, Stochastic Processes (IE, 
Covariance Matrix, Random Processes, MA) 

Signals and Systems (IE, 
Signal Transforms, Signals through LTI 

Core EE) 
Systems, Sampling and Quantization 

 
Basics of Complexity Analysis, Data Data Structures and 
Structures, Sorting, Searching, Shortest Algorithms (PC) 
Paths.  
Sampling and Reconstruction, Fourier 
Analysis (CTFT, DTFT), Discrete Fourier Digital Signal processing 

Signal Transform, Quantization Error Analysis,  (PC) 
Processing Finite Length Effects,  FIR and IIR Filter  

Techniques Design and Implementation, Multi-rate  
Systems 

Shannon’s lossless source coding theorem Information Theory and 
and rate-distortion theory Coding (PE) 

Signal Compression (PE) 
Speech Processing (PE) 

Systems Signal Processing and Interpretation System Identification (PE) 

Digital Image Processing 
(PE) 

4 
 



 
EE UG – Signal Processing Concentration Roadmap 

 

 
 

Area Category  Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 
Signals Through LTI Systems 

Signals and Systems 
Fourier, Laplace and z-Transform 

(IE),  
Systems Modelling in Time and 

Circuit Theory (PC) 
Frequency Domain 

Core 
Classical Control Theory, Characteristics of 

Control System (PC) 
Feedback Systems, State-Space Analysis, 

 
Controller and Observer Design, Compensation 

 
Techniques 
Vector spaces and Linear operators, State 
Feedback for MIMO and SISO systems, 

 
Control Discrete time system, Linear system stability, 

Techniques Modern Control (PE) 
Engineering Controllability, observability, reachability and 

 
stabilizability, Reduced order observer 
design, Separation principle 

Nonlinear and 
Adaptive Control (PE) 

Robust and Optimal 
Control (PE) 

Systems Cyber-Physical Systems 
Foundations of Cyber-
Physical Systems (PE) 
Introduction to 
Robotics (PE) 

5 
 



 
EE UG – Control Engineering Concentration Roadmap 

 

 

Area Category  Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 
Quantum Mechanical Tunneling Foundations of Quantum 
Bulk vs Quantum Properties Information Processing (IE, 
Crystals and Energy Bands PH) 

Material Science and 
Magnetic Materials 

Engineering (IE) 
Core Heat Transfer Thermodynamics  (IE, ME) 

Fourier Analysis Signals and Systems (IE, EE) 

Basic Circuit Theory Circuit Theory (PC) 
Engineering 

Devices Transmission Lines and Guiding Structures 
Electromagnetics  (PC) 

and 
Circuits Energy Band Formation, Drift and Diffusion, 

Physical Electronics (PC) 
Device Physics, MOS Capacitors and 

 
Transistors, High Power Devices, 

 
Unconventional Devices 
Review of MOSFETs, Single Stage and 

Techniques Analog Circuits (PC) 
Differential Amplifiers , Cascade and Cascode 

 
Amplifiers, Operational Amplifiers and 

 
Feedback, Small Signal and Frequency Response 

ASIC Design Flow, CMOS Implementation of VLSI Design (PE) 
Gates, Combinational and Sequential Circuits,  

6 
 



Static Timing Analysis, Floor planning and 
Routing, Packaging 

Integrated Circuit 
Technology (PE) 

Sensors and Actuators (PE) 
Systems Nano-electronics and Integrated Circuits 

CAD for VLSI(PE) 

Physics and Modeling of 
MOS Transistor (PE) 

 
EE UG – Devices and Circuits Concentration Roadmap 

 

 
 

 
Area Category  Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 

Probability, Random Variables,  
Probability, Statistics and 

Concentration bounds, Linear 
Stochastic Processes (IE, MA) 

Prediction, Covariance Matrix,  
Signal Transforms, Signals through LTI 

Signals and Systems (IE, EE) 
Systems, Sampling and Quantization 
Design of Digital Circuits Digital Design  (PC) 

Core 
Computing Implementation using Verilog/HDL  
Systems Basics of Complexity Analysis, Data Data Structure and Algorithms 

Structures, Sorting, Searching, Shortest (PC) 
Paths  

Pattern Recognition and 
Learning methods 

Machine Learning (IE) 
Techniques Pipelined Processing, Memory Computer Architecture (PC) 

Organization, Interfacing  

7 
 



Sampling Theory and Signal 
Reconstruction, Fast Fourier Transform, Digital Signal Processing (PC) 
Digital Filters 
Microprocessors and Microcontrollers, Embedded Systems (PC) 
Memory Interfacing, Arm Mbed  
Interfacing with GPIOs, Interfacing DC 
Motor, Keyboard Interfacing, Use of 

Digital Systems Lab (PC) 
Timers to produce delay, 
Implementation of Digital Filters  

Systems High Level Synthesis  (PE, CS) 
Real-Time Systems (PE) 
Reconfigurable Computing 

Embedded Computing and SoC (PE) 
Artificial Intelligence(PE, AI) 
Pervasive and Mobile 
Computing (PE, CS) 

 
EE UG – Computing Systems Concentration Roadmap 

 

 
 

Area Category  Topics Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 
Signal Transforms, Signals through LTI Signals and Systems (IE) 
Systems, Sampling and Quantization  
Network theorems, Step and impulse Circuit Theory (PC) 

Power response, Two-port network analysis,  
Core 

Engineering Three phase circuits  
Engineering Electromagnetics 

Maxwell’s equations, Wave propagation 
(PC) 

Thyristor, IGBT Physical Electronics (PC) 

8 
 



Transformers, DC machines, Induction 
Electrical Machines (PC) 

machines, Synchronous machines 
Electrical Machines Lab (PC) 

Control of machines using converters 
Transmission line modelling and 
performance, Per-unit representation of 

Techniques 
power system, Underground cables, 
Overhead line insulators, Power electronic Power Engineering (PC) 
converter based, compensation, Integration 
of renewable energy sources, Power system 
monitoring and protection 

Measurement and 
Instrumentation (PE) 
Power System Analysis and 
Stability (PE)  

Systems  Smart Grid Power System Operation and 
Control (PE) 
Power Electronics (PE) 
Industrial Drives  (PE) 

 
EE UG – Power Engineering Concentration Roadmap 

 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 



7. Course Categories, credit distribution and Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 
 

Table 2.ProposedCourse Categories and credit distribution in the proposed B.Tech. Programmes 
S.N.  Course Type Course Category  Regular B.Tech. 

Credit  Total 
1 Institute Core (I) Engineering (IE) 34 69 

 Science (IS) 16 
Humanities (IH) 12 

2 Programme Linked (L) Science (LS) 7 
3 Programme Core (P) Programme Compulsory (PC) 52 71 

Programme Electives (PE) 16 
B.Tech. Project (PP) 3 

4 Open (O) Open Electives (OE) 10 10 
5 Engineering Science (E) Engineering Science Core (EC) 0 0 

Engineering Science Elective (EE) 0 0 
Total Graded 150 

6 Non-Graded (N) Humanities (NH) 6 15 
Engineering (NE) 3 
Design/Practical Experience (ND)  6 

Total Graded + Non-Graded   165 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 



8. Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 
  
Table 4.Credit Structure for B.Tech. Programmes (Up to 6XXX Level) 

Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact hours Total Credits  
Contact Hours Beyond Contact Total Hours (TC=TH/3) 

(CH) Hours (BCH) (TH) 
1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1 
1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 hr 2 hr 3hr 1  
1 hour of Lab/Project 0-0-1 1 hr 0.5 hr 1.5 hr 0.5 

#Contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 



9. List of Programme Compulsory Courses 

Table 5. Programme Compulsory Courses 
Sr. No Course Name LTP Contact Hours Credit 

1 Data Structures and Algorithms 3-0-2 5 4 
2 Circuit Theory 3-0-0 3 3 
3 Engineering Electromagnetics 3-0-0 3 3 
4 Physical Electronics 3-0-0 3 3 
5 Digital Design 2-0-2 4 3 
6 Analog Circuits 3-0-3 6 4.5 
7 Electrical Machines 3-0-0 3 3 
8 Communication Systems 3-0-0 3 3 
9 Computer Architecture 3-0-0 3 3 
10 Control Systems 3-0-3 6 4.5 
11 Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 3 3 
12 Data Communication Networks 3-0-0 3 3 
13 Power Engineering 3-0-3 6 4.5 
14 Embedded Systems 3-0-0 3 3 
15 Digital Systems Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5 
16 Electrical Machines Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5 
17 Communication Systems Lab 0-0-3 3 1.5 

Total 52 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12 
 



10. ScanArea-wise Programme Elective Courses 

Table 6. Stream-wise Programme Electives Courses 
S. No. Stream Courses L-T-P Credit 

Information Theory and Coding (300) 3-0-0 3 
Computer Networks ( CS) 3-0-3 4.5 
Microwave Engineering (400) 3-0-0 3

1 Communication Cellular Communication Networks(400) 3-0-0  3
Satellite Communications (400) 3-0-0  3
Spread Spectrum Communications(400) 3-0-0  3 
Optical Communication Systems (400) 3-0-0 3 
Digital Image Processing (400) 3-0-0 3 
Speech Processing (400) 3-0-0 3 

2 Signal Processing 
Signal Compression (400) 3-0-0 3 
System Identification (400) 3-0-0 3 
Modern Control (300) 3-0-0 3 
Nonlinear and Adaptive Control (400) 3-0-0 3 

Control 
3 Robust and Optimal Control (400) 3-0-0 3 

Engineering 
Foundations of Cyber Physical Systems (400) 3-0-0 3 
Introduction to Robotics ( IDRP) 3-0-0 3 
VLSI Design (300) 3-0-0 3 
Biosensors (300) 3-0-2 4 

Devices and Integrated Circuit Technology (700) 3-0-0 3 
4 

Circuits Sensors and Actuators (400) 3-0-0 3 
CAD for VLSI (700) 2-0-2 3 
Physics and Modeling of MOS Transistor (700) 3-0-0 3 
Deep Learning ( AI) 3-0-0 3 
High Level Synthesis ( CS) 3-0-0 3 

Computing 
5 Real-Time Systems (400) 3-0-0 3 

Systems 
Reconfigurable Computing (400) 3-0-0 3 
Mobile and Pervasive Computing (CS) (700) 3-0-0 3 
M easurement and Instrumentation (300) 3-0-0 3 
Power System Analysis and Stability (400)  3-0-0 3 

Power 
6 Power System Operation and Control (400)  3-0-0 3 

Engineering 
Power Electronics (400)  3-0-0 3 
Industrial Drives (400)  3-0-0 3 

 
 
Mini-Project(0-0-6) 
Program elective component for 8th semester 
 
Design/Practical Experience (ND) 
Options: Three Summer Design Projects (0-0-4) for 2 Credits each or in regular semesters.   
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

13 
 



11. Specialization to be offered by the department 
Table 7. Specialization and courses 
 Name of Introduction 

S. No. 
Specializati
on 

  In today's world, there is a global interest to study systems that can interact with each 
  other and the surrounding with cooperative objectives, because of the 
  
  introduction of new and cheap computational and communication resources. Such 
  systems are usually referred to as cyber-physical systems (CPS). Almost, everything 
  around us constitutes a cyber-physical system. For instance, traffic networks, a swarm 
  of unmanned vehicles, smart power distribution networks, etc., are some of the recent 
  
  technological movements towards automation. 
  The philosophy of the cyber-physical systems vertical is to familiarize students with the 
  basic building blocks for the analysis and synthesis of such systems, along with hands-
  on experiments. The theme of this vertical span through the various core subjects 
  

ranging from design, control, and computing to safety and security of cyber-physical 
  
  systems. 
  Specialization Core Specialization Elective 
  (8 credits) (12 Credits) 
  
   Robust and optimal control 3-0-0  
   

Nonlinear and Adaptive control 3-0-0  
   

Modern Control 3-0-0  
   Networked Dynamical Systems and Control 3-0-0  
   Introduction to robotics 3-0-0  
 Cyber  Autonomous Systems 3-0-0  
  

Physical Real-Time Systems 3-0-0  
1  

System Reconfigurable Computing 3-0-0  
 Artificial Intelligence 3-0-0  
 Measurement and Instrumentation 3- 0-0 
  Computer Networks 3-0-3  

Introduction to System Identification 3-0-0 
Cyber physical  Computer Vision 3-0-0  

Systems 3-0-0/ Edge & Fog Computing 3-0-0  
Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks (VANETs) 3-0-0  

Foundation of Cyber 
Introduction to Smart Grid 3-0-0  

Physical Systems* 3- Smart Manufacturing 1-0-2  
0-0 Resource Constrained AI 3-0-0  

 Industry 4.0: Applications in Manufacturing Systems1-0-0  
Optimization 1-0-0  

Security in Cyber 
Specialization Project 0-0-6 

Physical Systems 2- Plugin Electric Vehicles (EE) 3-0-2
0-0 Selected Topic on Distributed Generation (EE) 3-0-0

 Introduction to Haptics (EE) 3-0-0
Ad Hoc wireless network (CS) 3-0-0

Advanced Control Human machine interface (CS) 
System 3-0-0 Security and its Applications (CS) 3-0-0 

5G networks (CS) 3-0-0
Artificial Intelligence I (CS) 3-0-0
Artificial Intelligence II (CS) 3-0-0
Real-time Autonomous systems (CS) 3-0-0
Social Network analysis (CS) 3-0-0
Graph theory and its applications (CS) 3-0-0
Introduction to Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality (CS) 3-0-0 
Computer Graphics (CS) 3-0-0 
Computational optimization (CS) 3-0-0 
Dependable AI (CS) 3-0-0 
Robotics and mobility systems (RMS) 3-0-0
Mobile robots (RMS) 3-0-0 
Autonomous systems (RMS) 3-0-0
Aerial Robots (RMS) 3-0-0
Planning and decision making for robots (RMS) 3-0-0 
Tele Robots (RMS)3-0-0
Dynamical Systems (MA)3-0-0
Introduction to data science (MA)3-0-0
Mathematics for data science (MA)3-0-0
Nonlinear dynamics and chaos (MA)3-0-0

  
*If  a student does Foundation of CPS, she/he will be  exempted from Introduction to CPS course. 

 14 



Name of Introduction 
S. No. 

Specialization  

The fast development of economy and society requires modern and high-
performance communications systems that can reliably communicate the 
massive amount of data originating from various sources including Internet of 
Things, while still offering acceptable levels of energy consumption, equipment 
cost and network deployment and operation cost. To achieve these objective 
communication engineers require a deep mathematical understanding of the 
trade-offs involved in efficient reliable communication design and circuits and 
systems for future communication systems. 
 
The core component of the Communication Engineering specialization enables 
students to face these challenges by focusing on topics involving 
communication theory, wireless networking and protocol design, security 
architectures, and system performance analysis. The elective bouquet provides 
students an opportunity to either gain required depth for graduate level 
academic programs of their choice or sufficient breadth to expose them to 
defining technology for future generation communication systems including 
optical and millimeter wave technologies. 
 
Specialization Core  Specialization Elective  
(8 credits) (12 Credits) 

Cellular Communication Networks 3-0-0 

Communication MIMO Wireless Communications 3-0-0 
2 

Engineering UAV Assisted Wireless Networks 3-0-0 
Spread Spectrum Communications 3-0-0 
Cryptography and Network Security 3-0-0 
Statistical Decision Theory 2-0-0 
Machine Learning for Communications 3-0-0 
Advanced Digital Signal Processing 3-0-0 
Multi-rate Digital Signal Processing 2-0-0 

Optical Communication 
Adaptive Signal Processing 3-0-0 

Systems(3-0-0) 
Quantum Communications 3-0-0 

 
Optical Techniques for Communications 2-0-2 

Wireless Communications 
Optical Signal Processing 3-0-0 

(3-0-0) 
Optical Fiber Communications 3-0-0 

 
Free Space Optical Communication 3-0-0 

Digital Communications: 
Optical Networks 3-0-0 

Hands-on (1-0-2) 
Antenna Engineering 3-0-0 
RF Integrated Circuits 3-0-0 
Millimeter Wave Technology 3-0-0 
RF System Design for Communications 3-0-0 
Radar Engineering 3-0-0 
Selected Topics in Communication I 1-0-0 
Selected Topics in Communication II 2-0-0 
Selected Topics in Communication III 3-0-0 
Specialization Project 0-0-3 

The development of communications has vastly relied on theories and models, 
from information theory to channel modelling. These traditional approaches are 

Intelligent showing serious limitations, especially in view of the increased complexity of 
Communication communication networks. The advent of 5G is introducing new challenges for 

3 and Networking mobile communications service providers, and integrating artificial 
 intelligence/machine learning techniques into networks is one way the industry 
(EE, AI and CS) is addressing these complexities.  Advances in artificial intelligence, particularly 

taking advantage of rapidly increasing network and user behavior data, 
indicates a new technological frontier of communications and networking, not 

15 
 



only in new methodology in systems and network design, but also in new 
network architecture accommodating machine learning  for broader and 
efficient services.  
 
The main objective of specialization in Intelligent Communication and 
Networking is to introduce students to new trends, approaches, methods, 
systems, as well as communication network architectures and application of 
artificial intelligence and machine learning to address communication network 
management issues. 
 
Specialization Core  Specialization Elective  
(8 credits) (12 Credits) 

Computer Networks  
Computation Oriented Communications  
Machine Learning  for Communications 
Real-Time Communications 

Design and Analysis of 
Delay Tolerant Networks 

Communication Networks (3-0-2) 
Cognitive Internet of  Vehicles 

 
Hardware-Aware Communications 

Intelligent Radio Networks (3-0-2) 
Selected Topics in Communication I 

 
Selected Topics in Communication II 
Selected Topics in Communication III 
Specialization Project 0-0-6

This specialization is designed to attract highly motivated students who are 
interested in the signal processing domain with a focus on visual computing. 
Current and future industry trends indicate increased involvement of visual 
computing for various automation processes, healthcare, and entertainment. 
The designed curriculum aims to provide education with excellence in some of 
the emerging areas which fall under the broad umbrella of visual computing. 
The curriculum is designed to enable students in choosing a variety of career 
paths such as intelligent visual computing, industry, and entrepreneurship. 
Graduates with specialization in visual computing are expected to have the 
attributes such as strong understanding of fundamentals of Mathematics, Signal 
Processing, Speech Understanding, Computer Vision, Computer Graphics, 
Haptics, Multimedia Processing, and AR/VR. 
 
Specialization Core  Specialization Elective  

Visual 
(8 credits) (12 Credits) 

Computing 
4  Computational Imaging [3-0-0]

(EE, CS, ME and 3D Shape Analysis [3-0-0]
AI) Introduction to Haptics [3-0-0]

Advance Machine Learning  [3-0-0]
Computational Photography  [3-0-0]
Video Processing  [3-0-0]
Bio-imaging  [3-0-0]

Computer Graphics  (3-0-0) Medical Image Analysis  [3-0-0]
Computer Vision (3-0-0) Image Synthesis  [3-0-0]
Visual Computing Lab (0-0-4) Animations  [3-0-0]

Digital Image Processing  [3-0-0]
Visual Perception  [3-0-0]
Introduction to AR and VR  [3-0-0]
Real-Time Vision Architectures  [3-0-0]
Scalable Machine Learning  [3-0-0]
Compressive Sensing  [3-0-0]

16 
 



Image and Video Forensics  [3-0-0]
Selected Topic: Advancements in 
Computer Vision
Selected Topics in Computer Vision
Specialization Project [0-0-6]
Principles of Biological Vision
 

The ever growing presence of social media and the need for more realistic ways 
of interacting via the digital world is fuelling novel and exciting industry 
innovations. Many industrial players (Google, Facebook, Microsoft etc.) have 
now dedicated centres and futuristic plans in the said area. Hence, this 
specialization seeks to provide students with fundamental knowledge that will 
enable them to design and innovate in several related areas within the broad 
theme of socio-digital reality. 
 

Socio-Digital Specialization Core  Specialization Elective  
5 Reality (8 credits) (12 Credits) 

(EE, CS and AI) Introduction to Haptics, 
Design Process, 
Speech Understanding, 

Social Network (3-0-0), Computer Graphics, 
Introduction to AR-VR (3-0-0) Human Computer Interface, 
Multimodal interface (0-0-4) Natural Language Understanding, 

Computer Vision, 
Image and Video Forensics 
Specialization Project 0-0-6 

Semiconductor devices have been at the core for advancement of the current IC 
industry. Till now, the technology has followed Moore’s law for scaling towards 
the sub-10 nm era. To accomplish that, various new materials and device 
structures have found a place in current generation chips. Moreover, various 
issues related to technology scaling such as quantum mechanical effects have 
found importance in R&D for new generation devices. In addition, new non-
volatile memory technologies have been explored for faster and denser 
alternatives to conventional Random Access Memories. Moreover, technologies 
such as Flexible Electronics have emerged as a potential candidate for large area 
and low cost options for hybrid integration of flexible components.  
 
To train the students in this specialization and cover the essential fundamentals, 
three core components have been chosen: Quantum Nano-electronics, Flexible 

Nano and and Printed electronics, & Emerging Devices including alternate transistor 
6 Flexible structures and new non-volatile memory devices. These will provide 

Electronics fundamental understanding of new generation nanoelectronics, related 
processing, and characterization. The electives will help in shaping the ability of 
the students to think creatively, provide an in depth cognition and expose them 
to deliver towards direct applications and also to undertake industry relevant 
research. A combination of nano and flexible electronics will prepare students 
for new age challenges such as cost, power, and wider suitability for various 
applications.  
 

Specialization Core  Specialization Elective  
(8 credits) (12 Credits) 

Introduction to Spintronics (3-0-0) Nano Sensors 
Flexible and Printed Electronics (3-0-0) Quantum Nano-Electronics 
Advanced Compact Modeling (2-0-0)  Non-Volatile Memory Technologies 

17 
 



Semiconductor Optoelectronics 
Organic Optoelectronics 
Specialization Project 0-0-12  

Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT) is a combination of artificial intelligence 
(AI) technologies with the internet of things (IoT) infrastructure to achieve more 
efficient IoT operations by enhancing data management and analytics. This is 
transformational and mutually beneficial for both technologies as AI improves 
data analytics and decision making capabilities through machine learning and 
IoT adds value through better connectivity, signalling and data exchange. 
 
The specialization in AIoT is designed to impart knowledge in a wide variety of 
fields such as IoT, communications, VLSI, computing, AI and ML. Design of IoT 
system architecture, its components and applications along with machine 
learning and AI algorithms is covered through courses such as Introduction to 
IoT and Artificial Intelligence. Industry relevant circuit design practices are 
included in courses such as Analog and Interfacing Circuits and Digital and SoC 

Artificial 
Design. The program also features hands-on implementation of IoT systems 

Intelligence of 
through labs and tutorials. 

7 Things (AIoT) 
 Specialization Core  Specialization Elective  
(EE, CS and AI) (8 credits) (12 Credits) 

Embedded System (3-0-0)
Microsystems Fabrication Technology (2-0-2)
Sensors and Measurement (2-0-0)
Deep Learning (3-0-0)
Advance Machine Learning (3-0-0)

Artificial Intelligence / Advanced Advanced Artificial Intelligence (3-0-0)
Machine Learning (3-0-0)  Edge and Fog Computing (3-0-0)
Hardware Software Co-Design Neuromorphic Computing and Design (3-0-0)
(3-0-2) Analog and Interfacing Circuits (3-0-2)
IoT Systems Architecture (1-0-0) Data Communication and Networking (2-0-2)

Resource Constrained AI (3-0-0)
Specialization Project [0-0-6] 
 Mobile and Pervasive Computing (3-0-0)    
 VANET(3-0-0)     
 Virtualization and Cloud computing (3-0-0)    

In the current era of Internet-of-Things (IoT), Artificial Intelligence (AI) and 5G 
Circuits, there are multiple prototypes being proposed and demonstrated these 
days for smart and real-time applications. To support this, high-speed 
circuits/systems are required which should be able to handle high bandwidth 
requirements of these applications. Over the decades, Very Large Scale 
Integration (VLSI) technologies have been a robust way to implement the 
required functionality through digital systems implementation and make it very 
easy for the designers at different abstraction levels to transfer the intellectual 
properties. For meeting timing and power requirements in these systems, 
various aspects of application-specific integrated implementation of digital and 

VLSI  Systems analog circuits/systems is required. 
8   

(EE and CS) This program aims to provide the students an exposure by making them 
understand the functioning, designing and testing of VLSI Circuits and System 
as well as their performance assessment criteria. The program includes a variety 
of detailed courses on Analog Circuits, Digital Circuits, Mixed-Signal Circuits, 
Synthesis, Verification and Testing. These courses address state-of-the art 
design methodologies as well as current trends in the industry such as high-
speed design issues and techniques.  
 

Specialization Core  Specialization Elective  
(8 credits) (12 Credits) 

18 
 



EEL7XX0 VLSI Broadband Communication 
Circuits [3-0-0]

Hardware Design for Artificial EEL7XX0 VLSI Testing [2-0-0]
Intelligence 3-0-0 EEL7XX0 Hardware Software Co-Design 

[3-0-2]
Formal Verification 2-0-0 CSL7XX0 Neuromorphic Computing and 
Advanced VLSI Design and Lab 2-0- Design [3-0-0]
2 EEL7XX0 Image Sensor Design and 
 Applications [3-0-0

Specialisation Project [0-0-6]
CSL7XX0 High Level Synthesis [3-0-0]

Society’s ability to utilize more renewable energy like wind and solar power is 
limited by the fact that our existing energy architecture was designed a century 
ago. The current system relies on large, centrally controlled power plants with 
predictable outputs. But wind and solar power fluctuates with environmental 
conditions, are difficult to control, and the power they generate requires 
conversion. Adapting the existing grid to operate reliably with renewable 
energy sources is a complex task. A new architecture for power distribution, 
called the smart grid, is required to accommodate renewable energy. 
New technologies can have transformative impacts on remote communities that 
are not served by traditional power grids. Power distribution challenges are 
faced all over the world and the students should have an opportunity to receive 
training in advances in smart grid technology. 
 
Specialization Core  Specialization Elective  
(8 credits) (12 Credits) 

Smart Grid 
9 Power System Protection 3-0-0 

 
Power System Dynamics and 
Control 3-0-0 
HVDC & FACTS 3-0-0 
Power Systems Restructuring 3-
0-0 
Power Quality Mitigation 

Introduction to Smart Grid 3-0-0 
Techniques 3-0-0 

Renewable Energy Systems 3-0-0 
Plugin Electric Vehicles 3-0-2 

Power Quality 2-0-0 
Power System Reliability and 
Security 3-0-0 
Selected Topics in Distributed 
Generation 3-0-0 
Introduction to Cyber-Physical 
Systems 3-0-0
Specialization Project 0-0-3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

19 
 



12. Curriculum of B.Tech. inElectrical  Engineering  (Regular) 
 

Cat Course LTP CH NC GC Cat Course LTP C N G
H C C 

 I Semester   II Semester   

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IE Engineering 2-1-0 3 - 3 
Electrical Mechanics 
Engineering 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Chemistry  3-0-0 3 - 3 
Computer Science 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Physics  3-0-0 3 - 3 
Bioengineering 

      IS Chemistry Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1 
      IS Physics Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1 

IS Mathematics I  3-1-0 4 - 4 IS Mathematics II 3-1-0 4 - 4 
IE Engineering 0-0-2 2 - 1 IE Engineering 0-0-2 1 - 1 

Visualization Realization 
NE Engineering Design 0-0-2 2 1 - NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - 

I  Design II  
NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - 

Skill I  Skill II  
NH Social Connect and 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Social Connect 0-0-1 1 0. - 

responsibilities I and 5 
responsibilities 
II 

NH Performing Arts I 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Performing Arts 0-0-1 1 0. - 
/Sports I  II/Sports II 5 

Total 12-1-14 27 3 17 Total 11-2-12 2 3 1
5 6 

 III Semester  IV Semester 

IE Materials Science & 3 ×  3 - 3 IE Pattern 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Engineering  1-0-0   Recognition and 
Fractal 1 – Energy Machine 
Materials Learning 
Fractal 2 – 
Magnetic Materials 
F3 – Computational 
Material Design 

IE Signals and 3-1-0 4 - 4       
Systems 

IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4  PC Circuit Theory 3-0-0 3 - 3 

LS                 3-1-0 4 - 4 PC Engineering 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Probability,  Electromagnetic
Statistics and  s 
Stochastic 
Processes 

LS Foundations of 3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Digital Design 2-0-2 4  3 
Quantum 
Information 
Processing 

20 
 



PC Data Structure and 3-0-2 5 - 4 PC Physical 3-0-0 3  3 
Algorithms Electronics 

NE Intro. To Profession  0-0-2 2 1  IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3 - 3 
            

Total 18-3-4 25 1 22 Total 17-0-4 2 - 1
1 9 

 V Semester  VI Semester 
PC Analog Circuits 3-0-3 6 - 4.5 PC Power 3-0-3 6 - 4.

Engineering 5 
PC Electrical Machines 3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Digital Signal 3-0-0 3 - 3 

Processing 
PC Communication 3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Data 3-0-0 3 - 3 

Systems Communication 
Networks 

PC Computer 3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Embedded 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Architecture Systems 

PC Control Systems  3-0-3 6 - 4.5 PC Communication 0-0-3 3 - 1.
Systems Lab 5 

      PC Digital Systems 0-0-3 3 - 1.
Lab 5 

      PC Electrical 0-0-3 3 - 1.
Machines Lab 5 

IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3 PE Program/Open 3-0-0 3  3 
Elective 

NH Professional Ethics 0-1-0  1 - NH Professional 0-0-2 2 1 - 
I Ethics II 

Total 18-1-6 24 1 21 Total 15-0-14 2 1 2
9 1 

 VII Semester  VIII Semester 
PP B. Tech. Project  0-0-6 6 - 3 IH Humanities IV 3-0-0 3 - 3 
PE                - - - 9 PE Programme/Op - - - 1
/ Programme/Open / en Electives 4 

OE Electives OE 
IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3       
IS Environmental 2-0-0 2 - 2       

Science 
Total 15-0-6 - - 17 Total 17-0-0 - - 1

7 
Total of Graded Credit - 1

5
0 

Total of Non-Graded Credit  9 - 
Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 

Grand Total 165 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 



14. Detailed Program Compulsory Course Contents 
 

Title Physical Electronics Number EEL2XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. EE Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Quantum Mechanics   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background knowledge of basic semiconductor and semiconductor component physics and to use 

relevant theoretical models for calculating properties and performance of semiconductor materials and 
components.  

2. Make students familiar with handling characterization of semiconductor components and circuits. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Describe the crystal structure and electronic band structure of the most common semiconductor materials, 

along with calculation of properties of semiconductors and charge transport. 
2. Explain the physics of p-n junction, the function and transport characteristics of the p-n diode, the bipolar 

transistor and the MOSFET transistor 
3. Describe metal-semiconductor junctions and semiconductor hetereojunctions and their application in 

electronic components 
 
Contents  
Foundation [8 Lectures]: 
Crystal structure, Review of quantum mechanics (3 L); 
Electrons in periodic lattices, E-k diagrams, Electrons, holes and phonons. Effective mass, intrinsic & extrinsic 
semiconductors, free carrier and carrier concentration and Fermi-level (5 L). 
Charge Transport [4 Lectures]: Scattering and Drift, Mobility, Hall Effect, excess carriers. Surface recombination, 
electrostatic field and built-in electric field. 
PN junction [7 Lectures]: 
Electrostatics, equilibrium and depletion approximation. Reverse bias transition capacitance, breakdown in PN 
junctions (4L) 
PN junction under forward bias, minority carrier injection, DC current-voltage characteristics, Temperature 
effect (3L) 
Non-ideal diodes [5 Lectures]:Tunneling diodes, AC Analysis, charge storage and transient characteristics; 
Schottky barrier diodes,Ohmic contacts, Heterojunctions. 
Bipolar transistors [8 Lectures]: 
Derivation of I-V and current gain expressions, Equivalent circuits, Frequency response. (4 L); 
pnpn structures, Silicon controlled rectifier, thyristor, Gate turn-off thyristor, Insulated-Gate bipolar transistor 
(4 L). 
MOS Structure and Transistors [10 Lectures]: 
MOS capacitors, Flatband and threshold voltages (3 L);  
Static MOS transistor, I-V Characteristics, MOS transistor equivalent circuit, cutoff frequency (4 L); 
Body effect, Short Channel Devices, basic CMOS fabrication (3 L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Neamen, D. Biswas, D., (2017), Semiconductor Physics and Devices, 4th Edition, McGraw Hill  
2. Streetman, B. G., Banerjee S. K., (2015), Solid State Electronic Devices, 7th Edition, Pearson Education India 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Solid State Devices, NPTEL Course, Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering, Indian Institute 
of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117106091/  

 
 
 
 

22 
 



Title Circuit Theory Number EEL2XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. EE Type Foundation course 
Prerequisite Signals and Systems   
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Teach the fundamentals of circuit elements and analyses. 
2. Teach the time and frequency domain analyses of circuits.  
3. Discuss the stability of a network. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Solve different electric circuit problems in time and frequency domain.  
2. Analyze various two port networks and their stabilities. 
 
Contents   
Review of fundamental circuit elements, sources, and theorems [4 Lectures]: Properties of resistor, capacitor, inductor, 
and various sources. Discussion and problem solving  on KVL, KCL, maximum power transfer theorem, 
compensation theorem, Thevenin and Norton theorems, Millman's theorem, Miller effect, Tellegen's theorem,  
graph theory approach of circuit analysis.    
Three phase systems [4 Lectures]:Three phase voltage and current, star-delta connections, line-to-line and phase 
quantities, balanced and unbalanced circuits and power measurements.  
Two port network analysis and synthesis [6 Lectures]:  
Representation of two port networks in terms of impedance (Z) and admittance (Y) parameters, Transmission 
(ABCD) parameters, Hybrid (h) parameters, g-parameters, Scattering (S) parameters and their suitable 
applications (4L) 
Idea of reciprocal and symmetric networks. Equivalent network parameters of series and parallel connections 
of networks (2L) 
Analyses and synthesis of R-L-C networks [8 Lectures]:  
Analyses of R-L, L-C, R-C circuits under DC and AC excitations. Finding out initial conditions and the solution 
of differential equations associated with RLC circuits in time domain (4L) 
Network functions, Foster and Cauer synthesis, Helmholtz delay concept. (2L) 
Series and parallel resonances, Q-factors, selectivity (2L) 
 
Frequency domain analyses [8 Lectures]:  
Idea of complex frequency and s-domain. Time domain to frequency domain transformation (4L) 
Applications of Laplace and Fourier transforms in electric circuits. Poles and zeros of a network, Bode plot, 
stability analyses (4L) 
Filter synthesis [6 Lectures]:  
Filter definitions and specifications, basic L-C filter, lattice structure (2L) 
m-derived filter, Butterworth and Chebyshev filters, active filter(4L)   
 
N.B.  A total of six more class sessions will be included to solve numerical problems. 
 
Textbook  
1. V. Valkenberg, (2007), "Network Analysis," Prentice Hall International Edition 
2. D. Chattopadhyay and P.C. Rakshit, (2000), "Fundamentals of Electric Circuit Theory," S. Chand & Company 
3. C.K. Alexander and M.N.O. Sadiku, (2003) "Fundamentals of Electric Circuits," McGraw Hill. 
4. E. A. Guillemin, (1953) "Introductory Circuit Theory," John Wiley and Sons 

 
Self Learning Material  
1. MIT open course on "Circuits and Electronics," https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-

computer-science/6-002-circuits-and-electronics-spring-2007/.     
 
 
 

23 
 



Title Engineering Electromagnetics Number EEL2XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. 2nd Year Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Electromagnetism and Optics   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Familiarize behavior of Electromagnetic wave propagation in different medium and its application to solving 

practical electromagnetic fields problems  
2. Provide basic understanding about transmission line and radiating systems for solving engineering 

electromagnetic problems 
3. Provide basic understanding of wave propagation used in practical wireless propagation systems. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Formulate and analyse problems involving lossy media with planar boundaries using uniform plane 

waves.  
2. Solve engineering problems involving transmission lines, metallic/dielectric waveguides.  
3. Obtain basic understanding of different radiating systems and be able to use these in the design of 

rudimentary wireless communications systems 
 
Contents  
Review of Maxwell’s equations [4 Lectures]: Review of Maxwell’s Equation, time-harmonic fields, scalar and vector 
potentials, boundary conditions, Uniform plane wave 
Plane waves at boundaries [5 Lectures]:Plane wave reflection and refraction at boundaries: Normal and oblique 
incidence, Brewster angle  
Plane waves in dispersive media [5 Lectures]:quarter wave matching, wave propagation in dispersive media  
Transmission Lines theory [5 Lectures]: Transmission line parameters and equations, Input impedance, standing 
wave ratio and power 
Transmission Lines application [5 Lectures]: Smith chart, Impedance matching, Applications of transmission lines, 
Transient on transmission lines  
Guided wave [5 Lectures]: TE, TM and TEM waves, parallel-plate waveguide  
Waveguides [5 Lectures]: rectangular and cylindrical waveguides, waveguide resonators, dielectric guides 
Antennas [8 Lectures]:  
Hertzian dipole, half-wave dipole and quarter-wave monopole antennas, small loop antenna, antenna 
characteristics and arrays(5L) 
Wave propagation: Ground wave propagation, ionospheric propagation (3L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Hayt, W. H. & Buck, J. A.,(2015), Engineering Electromagnetics, 6th Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill  
2. Sadiku, M. N. O., (2015), Principles of Electromagnetics, 6th edition, Oxford University Press 
3. David K. Cheng, (1989), Fields and Waves Electromagnetics, 2nd edition, Pearson Education   
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Kumar P., Electromagnetic Theory, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology 
Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104087/# 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
Electromagnetics and Applications, Department of Electrical engineering and Computer Science, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MIT OpenCourseWare,https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-
engineering-and-computer-science/6-013-electromagnetics-and-applications-fall-2005/ 
  

 
 
 
 

24 
 



Title Digital Design Number EELXXX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Introduction to Electrical Engineering   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the fundamental concepts in digital logic and system design. 
2. Emphasize the modern design methodology to enable design practices using CAD tools. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. The students are expected to have the ability to Design and implement simple digital systems on FPGA 

boards.  
 
Contents  
Digital Logic Families, Voltage levels, Noise Margin, Power Dissipation, Fan-In, Fan-Out, CMOS Logic [3 lectures] 
Introduction to HDL, Design flow, Number representation, Arithmetic circuits: Fast Adders, Multipliers. [5 lectures] 
Gate delays, Transient output.[2 lectures] 
Multiplexers, Encoders, Decoders, Code Converters [5 lectures] 
Design and Analysis of Synchronous circuits, Memory Element in HDL, Counters and Shift Registers.[5 lectures] 
State Diagram, State Table, State Assignment and Reduction, Design of Finite State Machines (Melay and Moore), 
Timing analysis [5 lectures] 
Programmable Logic Devices: PLA, PAL, CPLD, FPGA. Implementation with FPGA. [3 lectures] 
 
Lab Experiments on Designing Arithmetic circuits, Universal Shift Registers, Frequency Divide and Timing 
circuits, ALU, UART, Serial Peripheral Interface, VGA, Control Applications: Vending Machine, Traffic Light 
Controllers, Game Circuits, Motor Control. 
 
Textbooks 
1. Brown S. and Vranesic Z., (2013), Fundamentals of Digital Logic with Verilog Design, McGraw-Hill, 3rd 

Edition. 
2. Unsalan C., Tar B., (2017), Digital System Design with FPGA: Implementation Using Verilog and VHDL, 

McGraw-Hill Education. 
3. Mano M.M.,  Ciletti M.D., (2018), Digital Design: With an Introduction to the Verilog HDL, VHDL and 

System Verilog, Pearson. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Roychoudhury, D., Digital Systems Design, Department of Electrical Communication Engineering, Indian 

Institute of Technology Kharagpur https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/105/117105080/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 



Title Analog Circuits Number  

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–3 [4.5] 
Offered for B. Tech Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Familiarize students with the concepts of analog circuits and give them a comprehensive overview of various 

amplifiers. 
2.  Deliver the knowledge of analog circuits by focusing on design and implementation. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Implement the concepts of CMOS Analog Design on real world problems and applications. 
2.  Design various analog circuits like single stage, differential amplifiers, operational amplifiers, filters for 

given specifications. 
 
Contents  
MOS Field-Effect Transistors: MOSFETs and its characteristics, operating modes [3 lectures] 
single stage amplifier, small signal equivalent circuits [5 lectures] 
Amplifier configurations [2 lectures] 
Concept of biasing, cascode and cascade amplifiers, current mirrors [5 lectures] 
Differential amplifiers: MOS differential pair, large and small signal analysis including common mode range 
and output swing, common mode rejection, passive and active loads [5 lectures] 
Frequency response of amplifiers: Fundamental concepts, High frequency model of transistors  
Frequency compensation, Miller’s theorem [5 lectures] 
Feedback: Negative feedback, Gain Desensitization, Bandwidth modification, Modification of I/O impedances, 
sense and Return techniques, Stability in feedback systems [5 lectures] 
Output Stages and Power Amplifiers: Basic stages, large signal considerations, class A, class B and class AB 
configurations, low drop out regulators [5 lectures] 
Operational Amplifiers: Op-Amp characteristics and specifications, concept of virtual ground [3 lectures] 
Inverting and non-inverting amplifiers, op-amp applications including voltage summer, integrator, 
differentiator, instrumentation amplifiers [4 lectures] 
 
Lab Experiments: It will include design and analysis of various analog circuits like single-stage amplifiers [3 
labs], differential amplifiers [2 labs], operational amplifiers and frequency compensation [3 labs], output 
stages [2 labs] for given specifications and applications. Students will be introduced with different circuit and 
design parameters like gain, bandwidth, ICMR, CMRR, PSRR, slew rate and others through DC, AC and 
transient analysis using SPICE simulations. It will also include implementation & characterisation of discrete 
off-the-shelf components using breadboard. 
 
Textbook  
1. Sedra, A. S., Smith, K. C., and Chandorkar, A. N., (2013), Microelectronic Circuits: 
International Version, 6th Edition, Oxford University Press 
2. Razavi, B., (2016), Design of Analog CMOS Integrated Circuits, 2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill Education. 
3. Gray, P. R, Hurst, P. J., Lewis, S. H., and Meyer, R. G., (2020), Design of Analog Integrated Circuits: 5 th 
Edition, Wiley 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Nagendra Krishnapura, Analog Integrated Circuit Design, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/11710603 

 
 
 
 
 

26 
 



Title Electrical Machines Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Introduction to Electrical Engineering,   

Circuit Theory 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide understanding of construction, principle of operation, performance, and control of various electrical 
machines used in the industry using power electronic converters 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze performance of different electrical machines 
2. Understand and develop converters and their control methodologies required for various electrical machines 

used in industry 
 
Contents  
Transformers [7 Lectures]:  
Three phase transformers- connections, testing, three winding transformers (5L)  
Auto transformers, tap-changing transformers (2L) 
Induction machines [12 Lectures]:  
Production of rotating magnetic field in three phase and two-phase ac machines-torque development- Types 
of IM-Equivalent circuit-Slip-torque characteristics (5L) 
Testing of 3-phase Induction motor -harmonic effects- Induction generator and its control (5L) 
Principle of operation of single phase induction motor and its equivalent circuit (2L)                                                                         
Synchronous machines [10 Lectures]:  
Principle-mathematical model of cylindrical and salient pole machines based on armature reaction (4L) 
Regulation, operation with infinite bus (4L)  
Synchronous motor- control (2L) 
DC motor control [4 Lectures]: AC-DC and DC-DC converter topologies and their applications in control of DC 
motors 
Induction machine control [9 Lectures]:  
DC-AC and AC-AC converter topologies (4L)  
Their applications in constant torque, constant power and slip power control of induction machine (5L) 
 
Textbook 
1.  Sen, P.C., (2007), Principles of Electric Machines and Power Electronics, 2nd Edition, Wiley 
2.  Fitzgerald, A.E., Kingsley, C. Jr., Umans, S.D., (2003), Electrical Machinery, 6th Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill 
3.  Dubey, G.K., (2001), Fundamentals of Electrical Drives, 2nd Edition, Alpha Science International Ltd 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Bhuvaneswari, G.,  Electrical Machines, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 

Institute of Technology Delhi 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/102/108102146/ 

2. Das,S.D., Fundamentals of Electric Drives, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104140/ 

3. Say, M.G., (1983), Alternating Current Machines, Pitman Publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 



Title Control Systems Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–3 [4.5] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Signals and Systems   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce Linear Time Invariant System. 
2. Teach design of linear feedback controller using time and frequency domain methods. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze linear control system and to understand effect of feedback. 
2. Design linear controllers.  
 
Contents 
Mathematical modeling of physical systems [8 Lectures]:  
State variable and Transfer function representations; Examples of modeling different types (e. g. Electrical, 
mechanical, chemical, biological, social etc.) systems [3L] 
Duality between the elements of different types of systems.  Linearity and linearization, Transfer function and 
its interpretation in terms of impulse and frequency responses, Block-diagram and signal flow graph 
manipulations [5L ] 
Characterization of systems [7 Lectures]:   
Time domain response for first order and second order systems; Damping ratio and natural frequency; Effect 
of dominant poles and zeros on system response; Concept of system Stability, Routh array, [4L] 
Frequency domain response of LTI system; peaking frequency, bandwidth; Link between time and frequency 
domain response indices.[3L] 
Analysis of Feedback [6 Lectures]:  
Sensitivity and complementary sensitivity function, Disturbance and noise reduction, [3L] 
Structured and unstructured plant uncertainties. Steady state errors and system types [3 Hours] 
Analysis of closed loop systems[13 Lectures]:  
Stabilityand relative stability [1L] 
Root-locus approach [5 L] 
Bode and Nyquist stability criterion [4L] 
PID and Lag-Lead Controller Design[3 L] 
State space modelling and state feedback control [8 Lectures]:  
State space modelling, [2L] 
Controllability and observability, [2L] 
State feedback and observer design [4L] 
 
Laboratory Classes (10-12 Classes) 
A few experiments will be conducted on simulation of different systems i.e. temperature control, power 
converter control using MATLAB as a tool. Experiments on servo position control, inverted pendulum, 
helicopter emulator system, Active suspension, Magnetic Levitation, coupled tank system.   
 
Textbooks  
1. Franklin, G.  F. ,  Powell, J.  D., and Emami-Naeini, A.  E.,(2002), Feedback Control of Dynamic Systems,  

Prentice Hall Inc.  
2. Nise, N., (2007), Control Systems Engineering, Wiley India 
3. Gopal, M., (2008),  Control Systems;  Tata McGraw Hill  

 
Self Learning Material  
1. Gopal, M.,  Control Engineering, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 

Institute of Technology  Delhi,   https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108102043/ 
 
 
 

28 
 



Title Communication Systems Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P[C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. 3rd Year Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Signals and Systems, Fundamentals of Probability   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide students an understanding of the concepts related to transmission and reception techniques for 
communications 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze and design basic communications systems 
1. Compare and contrast the strengths and weaknesses of various communication techniques  
 
Contents  
Introduction to Communication Systems [6 lectures]:  
Basic building blocks and quality of service requirements of communication systems [2L], 
Channel and noise modelling, power spectral density of noise, noise through LTI systems [4L]. 
Analog Modulation [4 lectures]:  
Need for modulation, Amplitude Modulation (AM), frequency division multiplexing, spectrum of AM [2L], 
Angle Modulation, spectrum of angle modulated signal [2L].  
Pulse Modulation [5 lectures]:  
The sampling theorem and time-division multiplexing [2L], 
Pulse modulation techniques, generation and detection of pulse modulation [3L]. 
Digital Transmission at Baseband [12 lectures]:  
Quantization, pulse code modulation, line codes, spectral characteristics of line codes [4L],  
Matched filter receiver, inter-symbol interference, eye-patterns [4L],  
Nyquist’s criterion for ISI free transmission, equalization and OFDM [4L]. 
Digital Transmission at Passband [15 lectures]:  
Binary digital modulation, QAM, signal constellation [4L],  
spectral characteristics of digital modulated signals [2L], 
digital receiver design - correlator receiver, optimal detectors [4L], 
bit error rate performance analysis over AWGN channels, power and bandwidth efficiency [5L] 
 
Textbook  
1. Haykin, S. and Moher, M. (2009), Communication Systems, 5th Edition, Wiley Press   
2. Lathi, B. P., Ding, Z., and Gupta, H. M. (2017), Modern Digital and Analog Communication Systems, 4th Edition, 

Oxford University Press 
3. Madhow, U., (2008), Fundamentals of Digital Communication, 1st Edition, Cambridge University Press 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Jagannatham, A.,  Principles of Communication Systems I and II, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 

Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104091/ and https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104098/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

29 
 



Title Communication Systems Lab Number EEP3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–3 [1.5] 
Offered for B. Tech.  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Communication Systems   
Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1.  Familiarize students with the generation and detection of analog modulated signals. 
2.  Expose students to end-to-end implementation of digital communication systems. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design, implement and test modulator and demodulator for different types of communication schemes. 
2.  Implement end-to-end digital communication systems over wireless links. 
 
Contents  
1. An introduction to measurement equipment like Signal Analyzer, AFG, Oscilloscope. 
2. Generation and detection of analog modulated signals. 
3. Study and implementation of phase locked loop. 
4. Generation and detection of pulse modulation schemes. 
5. Implementation of ISI channels and equalization. 
6. Generation and characterization of BPSK/QPSK modulated signals. 
7. Study and implementation of end-to-end communication system with digital modulation. (3) 
8. Demonstration of end-to-end optical communication systems (3) 
 
Textbook  
1. Haykin, S. and Moher, M. (2009), Communication Systems, 5th Edition, Wiley Press  
 
Reference Books  
1. Lathi, B. P., Ding, Z., and Gupta, H. M. (2017), Modern Digital and Analog Communication Systems, 4th Edition, 

Oxford University Press 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 



Title Power Engineering Number EE3XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–3 [4.5] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Electrical Machines, Engineering   

Electromagnetics 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an understanding of the functionalities of various components of the modern power system and 

their modelling 
2. Give exposure to modern power electronic converters to enhance the efficiency, economy, and controllability 

of the existing power system 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Model and evaluate the performance of a power system 
2. Propose converter topologies and their control strategies for enhancing the power system performance 
 
Contents  
Introduction [2 Lectures]: Structure of the conventional and modern power systems, conventional and renewable 
energy sources, load curve  
Mechanical aspects of overhead transmission line [4 Lectures]: The catenary curve, sag, and tension  
Modeling and performance of transmission lines [10 Lectures]: 
Conductor types, inductance and capacitance calculations (5L) 
Various models of transmission line representation (2L) 
Voltage regulation and efficiency, power circle diagram, need for compensation to enhance the performance 
(3L) 
Representation and modeling of the power system [5 Lectures]: Single line diagram, substation layout, mathematical 
models of various components, impedance diagram, per-unit system, per-unit reactance diagram  
Underground cables [6 Lectures]: 
Construction, grading of cables, dielectric loss and charging effect (4L) 
Merits of underground cables, need of dc transmission (2L) 
Corona [4 Lectures]: Corona phenomena, critical disruptive voltage, corona loss, factors affecting corona loss  
Series and shunt compensation in transmission and distribution [5 Lectures]: Principle of series and shunt 
compensation, introduction to series and shunt compensation devices  
Integration of renewable energy sources [6 Lectures]: 
Principles of solar PV and wind energy conversion- concept of MPPT in SPV and WE (4L) 
Converter topologies for grid integration techniques for solar PV and WE (2L) 
 
Laboratory Experiments 
Substation layout; estimation of transmission line parameters; performance of transmission lines with various 
models; reactive power compensation in transmission; power factor correction; testing of cables; 
implementation of series compensation; implementation of shunt compensation 
 
Textbook 
1. Stevenson,W.D.Jr., (1982), Elements of Power System Analysis, McGraw Hill International 
2. Wadhwa,C.L., (2010), Electrical Power Systems, New Age International Publishers 
3. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power Systems, Wiley India 

Press 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Sinha,A.K.,  Power System Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT 

Kharagpur,     https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/105/108105067/ 
2. Das, D., Power System Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT 

Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105140/  
 
 

31 
 



Title Digital Signal Processing Number EEL3XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Signal and Systems   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide students an understanding of analysis and synthesis of algorithms and systems that process discrete 
time signals, with emphasis on realization and implementation  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. interpret and process discrete/digital signal and systems 
2. analyze and provide solutions to practical implementation issues of DSP systems 

 
Contents  
Review of Discrete Time signals: Sequences, Discrete time processing of continuous time signals, Practical 
Sampling and reconstruction, sampling of band-pass signals; Discrete systems: attributes, DTFT, z-transform, 
Inverse systems (3 lectures) 
Computation of the Discrete Fourier transform (9 lectures): 
The discrete Fourier transform (DFT), Sampling of the discrete time Fourier transform, properties of the DFT, 
linear convolution using the DFT (5 lectures) 
Fourier analysis of the signals using the DFT, Direct computation of the DFT, Decimation-in-time FFT 
algorithms, Decimation-in-frequency FFT algorithm (4 lectures) 
Design of FIR filters (8 lectures): 
FIR filters with linear phase (2 lectures) 
Design of FIR filters by windowing (2 lectures) 
Park-McClellan’s method, Direct and Cascade form structures for FIR filters (4 lectures) 
Design of IIR filters (14 lectures): 
Introduction to IIR filter design, Design of continuous time low pass filters (3 lectures) 
Transformation of continuous time filters to discrete time filters (3 lectures) 
Design examples for low pass IIR filters, Frequency transformations of low pass filters. (5 lectures) 
Cascade, Parallel, Cascade-Parallel and Lattice structures for IIR filters (3 lectures) 
Multirate signal processing (5 lectures):  
Sampling rate conversion, implementation of Multirate systems, filter design for Multirate systems (2 
lectures) 
Noble identities, Type I & II polyphase representation, concept of Perfect Reconstruction Filter Banks 
(PRFB)  (3 lectures) 
Finite wordlength effects: Number representation, quantization of filter coefficients, Effects of finite 
wordlength on digital filters. (3 lectures) 
 
Reference Books  
1. Proakis, J. G. and Manolakis, D.G. (2007) Digital Signal Processing, 4th Edition Prentice Hall  
2. Mitra, S. K., (2008) Digital Signal Processing, 3nd Edition, McGraw Hill  
3. Manolakis, D.G., and Ingle, V. (2011) Applied Digital Signal Processing, 1st Edition, Cambridge University 

Press 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Basu, T. K., Digital Signal Processing, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, 

Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105055/ 
2. Dutta Roy, S. C., Digital Signal Processing, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of 

Technology Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/102/117102060/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Signals and Systems, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104100/ 

 

32 
 



Title Data Communication Networks Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech.  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Communication Systems   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background to understand the network protocols and architectures  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Model data networks and analyze their performance  
2. Understand the issues and design the next-generation data networks 
 
Contents  
Introduction [2 lectures]: Introduction to data communication, layered architecture. 
Data Link Control [8 lectures]: 
Measure of information, entropy, source coding [3L], 
Error detection: linear block code examples, cyclic redundancy check [3L],  
Retransmission strategies: ARQ protocols, framing [2L]. 
Delay models in Data Networks [8 lectures]:  
Introduction to Queueing theory, Little’s theorem, different queueing systems [4L], 
Priority queueing, Burke’s theorem, network of queues [4L]. 
Multi-access Communication [10 lectures]:  
Random access techniques, tree algorithms [4L]  
FDMA, TDMA, CDMA [4L] 
Reservation, polling, token ring and buses, High speed LANs [2L] 
Circuit Switching and packet switching [3 lectures]: Circuit-switched networks, packet switching principles, 
introduction to switch architecture, high speed switch scheduling 
Routing in Data Networks [6 lectures]:  
Spanning trees, shortest path routing [3L]  
Broadcast routing, optimal routing [3L] 
Flow and congestion control [2 lectures]: Window/Credit Schemes, Rate based schemes. 
TCP/IP and ATM [3 lectures]: TCP operation, TCP error, flow and congestion control, ATM reference 
architecture, transmission of ATM cells, ATM adaptation layer, traffic and congestion control. 
 
Textbook  
1. Bertsekas, D. P. and Gallager, R. G., (1992), Data Networks, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall 
2. Stallings, W., (2007), Data and Computer Communications, 8th Edition, Pearson 
3. Forouzan, B. A., (2007), Data Communication and Networking, 4th Edition, McGraw Hill 
 
Reference Book 
1. Tanenbaum, A.S. and Wetheral, D.J.  (2011), Computer Networks, 5th Edition, Pearson 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Modiano, E.,  Data Communication Networks, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical Engineering & Computer 

Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-
computer-science/6-263j-data-communication-networks-fall-2002/index.htm 

2. Pal, A.,  Data Communication, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105082/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 

33 
 



Title Embedded Systems Number EEL3XX 

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech. Type Core 

Prerequisite Basics of Computer Architecture   

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce concepts of different architectures and programming languages of embedded processors.  
2. Introduce concepts of Real time system and design of embedded systems.   
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Program and to design embedded system using embedded processors based on system specifications.  
2. Use different IDE and debugging tools.    
 
Contents  
Architecture of ARM Cortex M3 and Cortex A series processors; [5L] 
Introduction to Embedded Multicore Architecture; Multicore Processor Design Technique; Interconnection 
networks for Multicore Processors; [5L] 
Programmable Systems on Chip; Architecture of DSPs; Fixed and Floating point devices; Security at Hardware 
level [5L]   
Selection of DSP chips; Performance assessment of embedded processor [2L] 
Programming of Embedded processors using assembly and C; [5L] 
Models for program --data flow graphs; Programming of multicore processors; Assembly language 
programming of ARM Cortex M3;[4L]  
Hardware software co-design; [2L] 
Processes and real time operating systems; Multi-rate system;[2L]  
Real time scheduling algorithms e.g. RMA, EDF and their variants; [4 L] 
Energy efficient scheduling algorithms; Structure of Real Time operating system; Overhead of RTOS; [4L] 
Example of Real time operating systems e.g. real time Linux, Keil RTX Real-Time Operating System, 
programming of embedded processors with RTOS   [4L ] 
 
Text Books  
1. Wolf, M., (2014), High Performance embedded Computing: Applications in Cyber Physical Systems and 

Mobile Computing, Elsevier 
2. JoshephYiu, (2013), The definitive Guide to ARM Cortex M3 and M4 Processors, Elsevier. 
3. Buttazzo, G., (2011), “Hard Real-Time Computing Systems: Predictable Scheduling Algorithms and 

applications, Springer  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Chaudhury,S., Introduction to Embedded Computing , NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 

Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108102045/# 
 
PreparatoryCourse Material 
1. Wolf, M., “Computers as Components: Principles of Embedded Computing System Design” Third Edition, 

Elsevier 2012.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 



Title Digital Systems Lab Number EEP3XX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–3  
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Computer Architecture   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge of hardware/software tools and interfacing of embedded processor 
2. Provide knowledge of programming of embedded Processor 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Use IDEs for writing software for embedded processors. 
2. Design and test embedded systems for different application. 
 
Contents  
Experiments on Configuration of RTOS, booting sequence; evaluating scheduler responsiveness; using 
different peripherals like GPIO, Timers, I2C bus etc. Operating System for IoT devices; Platform for 
heterogenousIoT devices; Experiments on simulators of Computer Architecture. 
 
Textbook 
1. Xiao, P., (2018), Designing Embedded Systems and the Internet of Things (IoT) with the ARM®Mbed™, 

John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
2. Norris, D., (2018) Programming with STM32: Getting Started with the Nucleo Board and C/C++, 

McGraw Hill 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

  

35 
 



Title Electrical Machines Lab Number EEP3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–3 [1.5] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Electrical Machines   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide practical exposure on operation, testing and performance evaluation of various electrical machines 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Test, determine the parameters and evaluate the performance of various electrical machines 
 
Contents  
Laboratory Experiments 
Experiments related to the following topics will be conducted: 
Testing of transformers, parallel operation of transformers, load test of transformers, separation of losses, 
three phase connections, converter based three phase induction motor speed control, performance 
predetermination of induction motor, load test of induction motor, regulation of alternator, performance of 
alternator connected to infinite bus, slip test, parallel operation of induction generator with ac grid, speed 
control of DC motor using converters  
 
Textbook  
1. Say,M.G., (1983), Alternating Current Machines, Pitman Publishing 
2. Fitzgerald,A.E., Kingsley,C.Jr., Umans,S.D., (2003), Electrical Machinery, 6th Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill 
3. Dubey,G.K., (2001), Fundamentals of Electrical Drives, 2nd Edition, Alpha Science International Ltd 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
 



15. Detailed Course Content of Programme Elective Courses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Communications 
 
 
 
 
  

37 
 



Title Information Theory and Coding Number EEL3XX0 
Department EE L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Communication Systems, Basics of Probability   
Objectives  
The Instructor will describe mathematical principles of communication that govern the compression and 
transmission of data and the design of efficient methods of doing so 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Formulate the fundamental concepts of information theory such as entropy, mutual information, channel 

capacity 
2. Elaborate the principles of source coding and data transmission 
3. Apply information theoretic methods to communication systems 

 
Contents  
Mathematical definition of information and the study of its properties [8 Lectures]:  
Measure of information, entropy, entropy rate, relative entropy, differential entropy (4 Lectures) 
Jensen’s inequality, data processing inequality,  Fano’s inequality (4 Lectures) 
Source coding [4 Lectures]:  Efficient representation of message sources- AEP, Shannon-Fano-Elias, arithmetic 
coding.  
Communication channels and their capacity [7 Lectures]:   
Mutual information, information channel capacity (3 Lectures) 
Channel coding theorem (4 Lectures) 
Coding for reliable communication over noisy (Gaussian) channels. (5 Lectures) 
Gaussian multi-user communications [8 Lectures]:   
Parallel Gaussian channels (2 Lectures) 
Multiple access channels (3 Lectures)  
Broadcast channels (3 Lectures) 
Lossy source coding: approximate representation of message sources. (5 Lectures) 
Information Theory and statistics (5 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
Cover, T. M., and Thomas, J. A. , (2006), Elements of Information Theory, Wiley 
 
Reference Book 
1. Abramson, N., (1963), Information Theory and Coding, 1st Ed., McGraw-Hill Book Company Inc.   
2. C. E. Shannon, (1948), A Mathematical Theory of Communications, Bell System Technical Journal 
 
Self Learning Material  
Merchant, S. N.,  Information Theory and Coding, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117101053/   
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
 



Title Spread Spectrum Communications Number EEL4XX0 
Department EE L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Communication Systems   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Present an analysis of the performance and design of spread-spectrum communication systems 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Perform analysis on the performance of spread spectrum modulation formats. 
2. Analyze the performance of spread spectrum systems in the presence of interference. 
3. Analyze the performance of spreading code acquisition and tracking systems. 
 
Contents  
Types of spread spectrum systems [7 Lectures]: direct sequence (2 Lectures), frequency hopping (2 Lectures),  
time hopping (2 Lectures),  chirp and hybrid methods, OFDM-SS (3 Lectures) 
Sequences for spread spectrum communication: features, properties and generation methods (5 lectures)  
Initial code acquisition: techniques and performance analysis (5 lectures) 
Code tracking: techniques and performance analysis (5 lectures) 
Analytical Performance of spread spectrum systems (5 lectures) 
Spread spectrum systems in jamming environments (5 lectures) 
Low probability of intercept methods (5 lectures) 
Spread spectrum and electronic counter measure (5 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Dixon, R. C., (2010), Spread spectrum Systems, Wiley 
2. Simon, M. K., Omura, J. K., Scholtz, R. A. and Levitt, B. K., (2002), Spread Spectrum Communications 

Handbook, McGraw Hill 
3. Torrieri, D., (2015), Principles of Spread Spectrum Communication Systems, Springer 
 
Self Learning Material  
Sen, D.,  Spread Spectrum Communications and Jamming, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electronic 
and Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105136/ 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

39 
 



Title Optical Communication Systems Number EEL4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P[C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Communication Systems, Engineering Electromagnetics   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide students an understanding of the concepts related to transmission and reception techniques for 
optical communication systems 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze and design basic optical communications systems 
2. Compare and contrast the features of various optical communication techniques  
 
Contents  
Introduction to Optical Communication Systems [2 lectures]:  
Basic building blocks, optical transmitters, optical receivers, optical amplifiers [2L]. 
Optical transmission system considerations [8 lectures]:  
Attenuation, dispersion, line coding schemes, eye pattern [4L]  
Noise effects, attenuation and dispersion limited link design, pulse on pedestal power penalty  [4L] 
Modulation and Detection Techniques [12 lectures]:  
Optical modulation techniques, Intensity Modulation/Direct Detection system, SIM [4L] 
Coherent Optical Systems, homodyne and heterodyne detection [3L] 
BER performance in coherent and non-coherent modulation schemes [5L] 
Optical modulators [8 lectures]:  
Electro-Optic and Acousto Optic [4L]  
Tunable optical filters (grating filters, micro-ring resonators) [4L] 
Channel Impairments [12 lectures]:  
Optical fiber considerations-Pulse broadening [2L]  
Free space effects-turbulence models, weather conditions viz. fog, haze, drizzle [3L] under-water 
impairments [2L]  
Performance analysis: BER analysis under channel impairments, link budget, channel capacity [5L]  
 
Textbook  
1. Keiser, G. (2017), Optical Fiber Communications, 5 th Edition, McGraw Hill 
2. Chadha, D. (2013), Terrestrial Wireless Optical Communications, 1 st Edition, McGraw Hill. 
3. Chen A. and Murphy, E. (2011), Broadband Optical Modulators: Science, Technology and Applications, 1 

st Edition, CRC Press. 
  
Self Learning Material  
Kumar, K. P.,  Fiber-Optic Communication Systems and Techniques, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104113/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

40 
 



Title Satellite Communications  Number EEL4XX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Communication Systems, Data Communication   

Networks 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide an overall understanding of satellite communication systems, technologies and techniques and will 
equip them with the design tools for communication payload design. 

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Explain the structure, techniques and technology for satellite communication systems. 
2.  Design and plan satellite communication links for a prescribed quality of service. 
 
Contents  
Introduction of satellite systems [11 Lectures]:    
Services, frequency planning, space segment components, earth stations (5L) 
Bus and payloads, antennas and coverage (3L)  
Transparent and non-transparent transponders (3L) 
Satellite Systems Planning [16 Lectures]:    
Free space loss, EIRP, noise sources, noise temperature, sky noise G/T ratio (5L) 
C/N calculation for uplink and downlink (2L) 
Modulation, Demodulation and BER Analysis for APSK, OQPSK, CPFSK (5L)  
Intermodulation, back-off, interference and C/I calculation (4L)  
Multiple Access in Satellite systems [7 Lectures]:    
Fixed and demand assignment, traffic matrices mapping (3L)  
FDMA & TDMA operation, MF TDMA operation (4L)  
Satellite system Future Trends [8 Lectures]:    
Standards issues and technology developments: BSM, DVB-S2, Satellite UMTS (5L)  
A state-of-the art update on current innovations and new systems proposals: Hybrid Satellite-Terrestrial 
Communications (3L) 

 
Textbook  
1. Maral, G., Sun, Z., and Bousquet, M., (2009), Satellite Communications Systems: Systems, Techniques 

and Technology, Wiley & Sons 
2. Roddy, D., (2017), Satellite Communications, McGraw Hill Education 
3. Pratt, T., Bostian, C. W., and Allnutt, J., (2003), Satellite Communications, John Wiley & Sons  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Bandyopadhyay, K.,  Satellite Communication Systems, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electronic 

and Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105131/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

41 
 



Title Cellular Communication Networks  Number EEL4XX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Communication Systems, Data Communication   

Networks 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an understanding of fundamental issues related to frequency planning, resource allocation and 

interference management techniques in cellular communication networks. 
2. Introduce concepts and techniques used in existing and emerging cellular communication systems.    
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyze and design operational cellular communications networks. 
2. Compare and contrast the strengths and weaknesses of various cellular communication networks. 
 
Contents   
Introduction of cellular systems[9 Lectures]:  
Channel models and impairments (5L) 
Quality of service requirements, coverage planning (4L) 
Interference management techniques[12 Lectures]:  
Interference avoidance and interference cancellation(5L) 
Interference alignment (4L) 
Interference coordination – network MIMO  (3L) 
User and Resource Management [9 Lectures]:  
Association and handover management (4L) 
Transmit power control (5L) 
Emerging Cellular Network Technologies[12 Lectures]:  
Long Term Evolution (4L) 
Long Term Evolution Advanced (3L) 
5G technologies and beyond(5L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Miao, G., Zander, J., Sung, K., & Ben Slimane, S., (2016), Fundamentals of Mobile Data Networks, 

Cambridge University Press 
2. Rappaport, T. S., (2010), Wireless Communications – Principles and Practice, Pearson 
3. Bolcskei, H., Gesbert, D., Papadis, C. B., and Veen, A. V., (2006), Space-time Wireless Systems, Cambridge 

Press.  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Koilpillai, D.,  Introduction to Wireless and Cellular Communications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 

Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106/106/106106167/ 

2. ETSI 5G Technologies https://www.etsi.org/technologies/5g 
 
 
 
  

42 
 



Title Microwave engineering Number EEL4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite Engineering Electromagnetics   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide theoretical background to analyze microwave circuits and systems 
2.  Provide design principle of several commonly used microwave devices and sources 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Have basic understanding of different techniques related to microwave circuits and systems 
2.  Design basic microwave components and antennas 
 
Contents  
Transmission lines: Review of wave equation and transmission line [5 Lectures]: stripline, micro-stripline; slotline; 
coplanar waveguide line; Wave propagation in planar lines: design, effective dielectric constant, attenuation, 
dispersion, power-handling capability  
Impedance matching [3 Lectures]: Design of distributed circuits using planar lines, single and double stub 
matching, LC and multisection impedance matching network 
Network analysis [5 Lectures]: scattering-matrix, representation, properties, shift in reference planes, 
generalized S-matrix; Signal flow graph; basics of network analyzer 
Passive components [5 Lectures]: power splitters/combiners, directional couplers, Operation and S-matrices of 
resonators/cavities 
Non-reciprocal components[3 Lectures]:  isolators and circulators 
Microwave filters [5 Lectures]: image parameter method; insertion loss method low pass filter prototype of 
Butterworth & Chebyshev response; filter transformation - impedance and frequency scaling, filter 
implementation - Richards transformation, Kuroda identities 
Microwave Antennas [5 Lectures]: Planar dipole and monopole antenna, folded dipole, Microstrip antenna, 
introduction to slot antenna  
Microwave broadband Antennas [3 Lectures]: Yagi-uda antenna, log-periodic antenna, helical antenna, biconical 
antenna, introduction to reflector antenna  
Microwave solid state devices [4 Lectures]: RF diodes and transistors, IMPATT, Schottky, PIN diodes, HEMT 
Device  
Microwave sources [4 Lectures]:  Gunn Diode, klystron, magnetron  
 
Textbook  
1. D. M. Pozar, (2011), "Microwave Engineering," 4th ed. New York, NY, USA, Wiley 
2. David K. Cheng, (1989), Fields and Waves Electromagnetics, 2nd edition, Pearson Education   
3. Balanis C. A., (2016), Antenna Theory, Analysis and Design, 4th edition, Wiley Press 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Kumar, G.,  Microwave Theory and Techniques, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of 

Technology Bombay, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108101112/ 
2. Vedio Lecture: Antenna Engineering, Dr. Anthony Ferraro, Penn State Univ., 

USA,http://www.engr.psu.edu/cde/courses/ee438/index.htm 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
1. Electromagnetics and Applications, Department of Electrical engineering and Computer Science, 

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-
engineering-and-computer-science/6-013-electromagnetics-and-applications-fall-2005/ 

 
 
 
 

 

43 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Signal Processing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

44 
 



Title Signal Compression Number EE4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite Signal and Systems, Probability and Statistics   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide background in fundamental signal compression techniques such as lossless and lossy 
techniques for different types of signals. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. compress various type of signals such as audio and image  
2. analyze the trade-off between compression, computational or implementational demand and quality of 

reconstructed signal.   
 
Contents  
Introduction to Signal Compression [5 Lectures]: Information and Entropy, Distortion Measures such as 
PSNR, mutual-information, divergence, and Kullback-Liebler number 
Lossless and Lossy Coding [9 Lectures]: Huffman Coding, Arithmetic Coding, adaptive and predictive 
lossless coding (5 Lectures) 
Subband Coding, QMF bank. (4 Lectures) 
Quantization [7 Lectures]: Uniform and non-uniform Quantization, Vector Quantization, Structured Vector 
Quantization, Product Vector Quantization (4 Lectures) 
Differential Coding, Delta Modulation. (3 Lectures) 
Transform Coding [7 Lectures]:  
Wavelets, Multi Resolution Analysis (4 Lectures) 
Compression using DCT, DWT, KLT (3 Lectures)  
Representation Based Techniques [6 Lectures]: Sparse Representation, Dictionary Learning Based 
Approaches (4 Lectures) 
Machine Learning based Compression (2 Lectures) 
Compression Standards [8 Lectures]:  
JPEG, JPEG 2000 (4 Lectures) 
H264, MPEG. (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Sayood, Khalid, (2017). Introduction to data compression. Morgan Kaufmann. 
2. Gersho, Allen, and Robert M. Gray, (2012). Vector quantization and signal compression. Vol. 159. Springer 

Science & Business Media. 
3. Salomon, David, and Giovanni Motta (2010). Handbook of data compression. Springer Science & Business 

Media. 
 
Self Learning Material  
Prof. Ajit Rajwade, Digital Image Processing, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of 
Technology Bombay, https://www.cse.iitb.ac.in/~ajitvr/CS663_Fall2018/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material:   
Prof. S.C. Dutta Roy, Digital Signal Processing, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/102/117102060/ 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

45 
 



Title Speech Processing Number EEL4xxx 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech.  Type Program 

Elective  
Prerequisite Signal and Systems, Probability and Stochastic   

Processes 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. introduce the theory of signal processing applications on speech, to give information about human speech 

production and perception, voice production mechanism, and human perception systems. 
2. provide an understanding of time frequency analysis of speech, Linear Prediction, speech 

analysis/synthesis. 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. analyze digital signals, e.g., audio signals, in the time, frequency and joint time-frequency domains 
2. implement widely-used algorithms for speech analysis and speech processing in the frequency or 

time domain.  
 

Contents 
Introduction [6 Lectures]: Review of DSP basics, Filters, DFT, Short-time Fourier Transform, Spectrograms, 
Speech Production, Articulatory and Acoustic Phonetics 
Time Domain Analysis [16 Lectures]:  
Introduction to time series, probability models for time series, stationarity (5 Lectures)  
Moving average (MA), Autoregressive (AR), ARMA and ARIMA models, Estimating the autocorrelation 
function and fitting ARIMA models. (6 Lectures) 
Linear Prediction, Perceptually Based Linear Predictive Analysis, DPCM (5 Lectures)   
Cepstral Analysis [6 Lectures]: Time and frequency domain features, Cepstral Analysis, Mel Cepstral 
Analysis,  MFCC, Wavelets. 
Hearing Perception [4 Lectures] 
Applications [10 Lectures]: 
Compression, Recognition, Noise Suppression (5 Lectures) 
Music Event Classification, speech generation. (5 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Rabiner, L. and Schafer, R., (2011), Theory and Applications of Speech Processing, Pearson. 
2. Rabiner, L. and Schafer, R., (2007), Introduction to Digital speech Processing, Publishers Inc. 
3. Gold, B., and Morgan, N., (2011), Speech and Audio Signal Processing, John Wiley. 
 
Self Learning Material 
Prof. Alan W Black, Speech Processing, Carnegie Mellon University, http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/15-
492/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Prof. S.C. Dutta Roy, Digital Signal Processing, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/102/117102060/ 

 
 
 
  

46 
 



 
Title System Identification Number EE4XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite Signals and Systems,   

Basics of Probability  
Objectives 
The Instructor will provide students an understanding of system identification techniques and its applications.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to apply the learned techniques to solve practical problems such 
as echo cancellation, active noise cancellation, and deconvolution. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to System Identification [5 Lectures]: What is System Identification? How can we derive 
Algorithms? How do we evaluate the Algorithms? Stochastic vs. Non-stochastic Formulation.  
Nonparametric Identification [5 Lectures]: Impulse and Step Response, Correlation Methods, Spectral 
Analysis  
Parameter Estimation [12 Lectures]:  
Minimizing Prediction Error, Identifiability, Consistency, Biase (4 Lectures) 
Least Squares Relations between Minimizing the Prediction Error and the MLE, MAP  
(4 Lectures)  
Convergence and Consistency, Asymptotic Distribution of Parameter Estimates, The Instrumental-Variable 
Method (4 Lectures) 
Algorithms [8 Lectures]:  
Computing the Estimates, Recursive Estimation (5 Lectures) 
Kalman Filter Interpretation (3 Lectures) 
Identification in Practice [7 Lectures]:  
Aliasing due to Sampling, Closed Loop Data, Model Order Estimation (3 Lectures) 
Bounded but Unknown Disturbances, Identification in the Worst Case, Optimal Algorithms, Optimal Inputs, 
Robustness Consideration (4 Lectures) 
 
Applications [5 Lectures]: Echo Cancellation, Active Noise Cancellation, Deconvolution, Dehazing. 
 
Reference Books  
1. Ljung, Lennart (1998). System Identification: A Theory for the User. 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 

Hall. 
2. Keesman, K. J. (2011). System identification: an introduction. Springer Science & Business Media. 
 
Self Learning Material  
Prof. Arun K.Tangirala , System Identification, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/106/103106149/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Prof. V.M. Gadre, Signals and Systems, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electronics and 
Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/101/117101055/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Control Engineering 
  

48 
 



Title Modern Control Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Control Systems   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce time domain modeling of SISO and MIMO systems. 
2. Teach design of feedback controller using different time domain techniques. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. To analyze linear control system and to understand effect of feedback. 
2. To design controllers and Observers using different techniques for SISO and MIMO systems.  
 
Contents:  
Review of state space modeling technique, Solution of state space equation, State transition matrix; 
Linearization of nonlinear equations [4 Lectures] 
 
Discrete time system and difference equation representation of discrete time systems; solution of difference 
equation [4 Lectures] 
 
Vector spaces and Linear operators [6 Lectures]: Definition of linear operators; Operator Norms; Adjoint 
Operator; rotational operators 
 
Functions of Vectors and Metrices [6 Lectures]: Linear and multilinear functionals; quadratic forms; Bilinear 
forms as inner products; functions of matrices; Cayley Hamilton Theorem  
 
System Stability [5 Lectures]:Lypunov Stability; classification of Equilibria; Lypunov’s direct method; 
Relationship between different stability  
 
Controllability and Observability [4 Lectures]: PBH test for controllability; decomposing system into controllable 
and uncontrollable subspaces;  
 
Modal Controllability and Observability; Controllability and reahbility for discrete time systems; 
Observability and reconstructability [5 Lectures] 
 
State feedback and observer design [8 Lectures]:  
State feedback controller for SISO system; Multivariable canonical forms and state feedback controller design 
(4L) 
Reduced order and full order observer design (4L) 
 
Textbooks  
1. John Bay (2008), Fundamentals of Linear State Space Systems; McGraw Hill.    
2. Slotine, Jean-Jacques, and Weiping Li, (1991) Applied Nonlinear Control, Prentice-Hall. 
3. Brogan, William L(1991), Modern Control Theory, 3/e, Prentice-Hall, I991. 
   

  

49 
 



 
Title Nonlinear and Adaptive Control Number EEL4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Control Systems   
 
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce nonlinear and adaptive control systems. 
2. Teach design and analysis of feedback controllers for nonlinear systems in the presence of uncertainties. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. To analyze Nonlinear control systems. 
2. To design controllers and Observers in the presence of uncertainty.  
 
Contents:  
Introduction to Nonlinear Systems:  
Nonlinear models and nonlinear phenomena, Examples of nonlinear systems, [3 L] 
Concept of equilibrium points, Limit cycles [3 L]  
Small gain theorem, sector-based nonlinearities, Circle/Popov criteria [2 L] 
 
Stability Results:  
Lyapunov stability results, Barbalat's lemma, Krasovskii-LaSalle principle, Passivity theorems [7 L] 
Feedback linearization. [3 L] 
 
Reinforcement learning based control:  
Basics of Reinforcement learning technique, policy iteration, value iteration [3 L] 
Adaptive dynamic programming, Persistent Excitation. [4 L] 
Neural network, online adaptive dynamic programming, online policy and value iteration, actor-critic 
method. [5 lectures] 
 
Model predictive Control (MPC):  
Understanding MPC problem and advantages, Control and prediction horizon,  Controller design [5 L] 
Application of Adaptive Controller. [4 L]  
 
Textbooks   
1. Hassan K Khalil, (2002) Nonlinear systems, Prentice hall 
2. Kumpati S Narendra, Anuradha M Annaswamy, (2012), Stable adaptive systems, Courier Corporation 
3. Francesco Borrelli, Alberto Bemporad, Manfred Morari, (2017), Predictive control for linear and hybrid 

systems, Cambridge University Press 
 
Research Paper 
1. Frank L Lewis and DragunaVrabie, Reinforcement learning and adaptive dynamic programming for 

feedback control, IEEE circuits and systems magazine, 2009.  
 

  

50 
 



Title Robust and Optimal Control Number EEL4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Control Systems   
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce various optimal and robust control techniques for feedback control systems. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. To design and analyze feedback control systems in the presence of uncertainties. 
2. To design optimal controllers for linear and nonlinear systems.  
 
Contents 
Preliminaries 
Vector spaces and Linear operators, Review of state space modeling technique, Solution of state space 
equation, Euler-Lagrange equation [3 Lectures ] 
Controllability and Observability, State feedback controller, Observer.  [5 Lectures] 
 
Stability Results 
Optimal Control Theory: Lyapunov stability, Routh-Hurwitz criterion,  Nyquist criterion, Stabilizability 
and Detectability, [5 Lectures] 
 
Optimal Control Theory 
Principle of Optimality, Hamiltonian-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation, LQR, Kalman filter, Relation 
between LQR and Kalman filter. [5 Lectures] 
 
Robust control for Linear and Nonlinear Systems 
Uncertainty classifications, Matched and mismatched uncertainties, Uncertainty in input matrix [4 
Lectures] 
Optimal control approach for robust controller design, Stability analysis of uncertain systems.  [5 
Lectures] 
 
Kharitonov approach,  H2 and H∞ Control: Function space, Computation of H2 and H∞ norm [5 
Lectures]  
Kharitonov theorem, Robust Control problem formulations and design. [5 Lectures]  
 
Applications: Robust Active damping, Robust control of Robot Manipulator, Aircraft Hovering. [5 Lectures] 
 
Textbooks  
1. K. Zhou, J. C. Doyle and K. Glover, (1995), Robust and Optimal Control, Prentice-Hall, Englewood 

Cliffs 
2. Feng Lin,  (2007), Robust Control Design: An Optimal Control Approach,  Wiley    
3. S. P. Bhattacharyya, H. Chapellat, and L.H. Keel, (1995), Robust Control: The Parametric Approach. 

Prentice-Hall 
 
Relevant materials 
Robust Control Toolbox help file (in MATLAB).  
 

 
  

51 
 



Title Foundations of Cyber-Physical Systems Number EEL4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Familiarize students with the concepts of Cyber-physical Systems (CPS).  
2. Deliver the knowledge of CPS by focusing design and implementation.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
1. This course provides the knowledge of principles of operation and performance of CPS.  
2. The student must be able to design and develop CPS for various industry applications. 
 
Contents:  
Introduction to Cyber-physical Systems [5 Lectures]: Basic principles of CPS; Industry 4.0, AutoSAR,  IIOT 
implications; Building Automation, Medical CPS 
 
CPS - Platform Components [5 Lectures]: CPS HW platforms - Processors, Sensors, Actuators; CPS Network - 
WirelessHart, CAN, Automotive Ethernet; Scheduling Real Time CPS tasks 
 
Modelling and Control of CPS [10 Lectures]:  
Synchronous and Asynchronous Model;  Principles of Dynamical Systems (5L)  
Hybrid Systems; Control and Sensing Techniques (5L) 
 
CPS - Computational Issues [10 Lectures]:  
Effect of scheduling, bus latency (5L) 
Sense and actuation faults on control performance, network congestion. (5L) 
 
Applications of CPS [4 Lectures]: Robot motion control; Autonomous Vehicle control; Smart Grid; Building 
Automation 
 
Secure Deployment of CPS [8 Lectures]:  
Threat model; Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks and deception attacks (3L) 
Attack detection, location and validation; Secure state estimator (5L) 
 
Textbooks  
1. Rajeev Alur, Principles of Cyber-Physical Systems, MIT Press, 2015.  
2. Edward A. Lee and Sanjit A. Seshia, Introduction to Embedded Systems, A Cyber-Physical Systems 

Approach Second Edition, MIT Press, ISBN 978-0-262-53381-2, 2017. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

52 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Devices and Circuits 
 

  

53 
 



Title VLSI Design Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Elective Course 
Prerequisite Circuits, Basic understanding of electronics   
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Give overview of IC Technology and unit process 
2. Teach students the basics of digital circuit design methods.  
3. Provide the understanding of necessary concepts for digital VLSI design according to design rules decided 

by various technologies 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand designing and optimizing digital circuits with different quality metrics: cost,  speed, power 

dissipation, and reliability  
2.  Design the building blocks of digital systems  
 
Contents   
Introduction to VLSI Design, CMOS process sequence, fabrication and layout design rules [3 lectures] 
Technology Scaling, Effect of Process variations [2 lectures] 
Interconnect and wire models [2 lectures] 
CMOS Inverter, Static and Dynamic Behaviour, Propagation delay, noise margins, and power dissipation [4 
lectures] 
Static timing analysis, delay estimation using logical effort and Elmore delay [4 lectures] 
Designing combinational logic gates: Static CMOS design, Ratioed Logic, Pseudo NMOS, Pass Transistors 
Logic, design examples like multiplexers, decoders [4 lectures] 
Dynamic CMOS design, speed and power dissipation, choosing a logic style, design examples like clock 
generation circuits [3 lectures] 
Static Latches and Registers, Dynamic Latches and Registers, Alternative Register styles, pipelining, 
choosing a clock strategy [5 lectures] 
Timing Issues in Digital Circuits:  Timing classification, Synchronous Design, Synchronous timing basics, 
Skew and Jitter, clock distribution techniques [5 lectures] 
Memory Classification, Building Blocks, Memory core, Read only Memory, Read-write Memories, Memory 
peripheral circuitry [5 lectures] 
Decoders, Sense Amplifiers, Buffers, reliability, power dissipation, future trends validation and test [5 
lectures] 
 
Textbook  
1. Rabaey, J. M.,  Chandrakasan, A.,  Nikolic, B., (2011),  Digital integrated Circuits, A design perspective, 2nd 

Edition, PHI Learning 
2. Weste N. H. E., Harris D. M. (2009), CMOS VLSI Design, 4th Edition, Pearson 
3. Plummer J. D., Deal D. M., Griffin P. B., (2009) Silicon VLSI Technology- Fundamentals, Practice And 

Modelling, Pearson 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Chandorkar,A.N., VLSI Design, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 

Institute of Technology Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/101/117101058/ 

2. Chandrakasan,A., MIT OpenCourseware, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-374-analysis-and-design- 
of-digital-integrated-circuits-fall-2003/ 

 
 
 
 
 

54 
 



Title Biosensors Number EE3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [E] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Electrical and  Bio Engineering   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Make the students understand the fundamentals of working principles of biosensors  
2. Describe the bio-specific interaction used for various applications 
3. Evaluate and compare techniques used in today’s time like electric, optical and mechanical 
4. Show and explain the examples of practical and real world biosensors  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify the working mechanism of biosensors 
2. Understand the detailed characterization of biosensors in terms of specificity and selectivity 
3. Comprehend the functioning of commercial biosensors 
4. Create mechanisms for developing biosensors on their own by collaborating or working in an 

interdisciplinary group 
 
Contents   
Introduction to basics of sensors and biospecific interactions [8 Lectures]: 
Introduction to sensors and actuators, different components of biosensors, functionalization layers and their 
importance (4L) 
Biomolecules for biosensors, catalytic biosensors, affinity biosensors, biomolecular interaction (4L) 
Electrical and optical techniques for biosensing [8 Lectures]: 
Electrical - CV, ISFET (4L) 
Optical - Fluorescence, ELISA, SERS, SPR  (4L) 
Electrochemical, mechanical and advanced techniques for biosensing [11 Lectures]:  
Electrochemical (sub classifications like impedemetric, voltammetric, amperometric) (6L) 
Mechanical (Bio-MEMS), color based, microfluidics (including packaging), AI based biosensors(5L) 
Sensor key parameters and examples of commercially available biosensors [7 Lectures]: 
Sensitivity, selectivity, response- and recovery time, LOD etc. (4L) 
Industry standards and COTS bio-sensors and their functioning, need and relevance of biosensors in Indian 
context (3L) 
Readout Electronics[8 Lectures]: 
Basic circuitry to make readout electronics, Potentiostats, amperometric circuits, charge to voltage converter 
(4L) 
Variable gain amplifier, low noise amplifier, high resolution and low noise data converters, mismatch 
insensitive data converters (4L) 
 
Lab work: 
Biosensor material selection and characterization; Biochemical reagents and assays; Surface 
functionalization (Covalent/non-covalent) for Biosensing; Biosensor fabrication; Biosensor operation and 
signal generation; Biosensor sensitivity assay; Biosensor reproducibility; Biosensor Selectivity; 
Determination of limit of detection; Use of appropriate controls; Biosensor application on real samples. 
 
Textbook  
1. Yoon J.-Y., (2016),  Introduction to Biosensors, Springer 
2. Banica F.-G., (2012), Chemical Sensors and Biosensors: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley 
3. Rasooly A., Herold K. E., (2008), Biosensors and Biodetection, Humana Press, Science 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Materials for Biomedical Applications, MIT Open Courseware, 

https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/materials-science-and-engineering/3-051j-materials-for-biomedical-
applications-spring-2006/lecture-notes/ 

 

55 
 



Title Biosensors Number EE3XX0 

Course Title CAD for VLSI Number EEL7XX0 
 

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Pre-requisite VLSI Design   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to learn the concepts of computer aided design aspects of design of integrated circuits. 
2. Provide exposure to the students about automating design cycle for VLSI Design. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply principles of CAD for VLSI for digital designs. 
2. Implement the optimization algorithms for automated design of Analog circuits. 
 
Contents 
Introduction [2 Lectures]: Introduction to VLSI design methodologies and supporting CAD tool environment 
VLSI Design Automation [5 Lectures]: Overview of System C; Schematic editors; Layout editors; Module 
generators; Placement and routing tools; Behavioral, functional, logic and circuit simulators 
Algorithmic Techniques for Floor-planning [5 Lectures]: Algorithmic Techniques in VLSI CAD, Introduction of 
Floor planning, simulated annealing and mixed integer programming formulation 
Placement and Partitioning [4 Lectures]: Classical placement algorithms, Simultaneous level partitioning based 
PDP (Power Delay Product) 
Routing [3 Lectures]: General and Channel Routing, Global Routing, High-level power/current estimation. 
Optimization based Analog Design [4 Lectures]: Analog Circuit Design Challenges, Performance metrics and 
trade-offs, Deterministic and metaheuristic optimization based automated design flows at transistor level.  
Verilog-A [5 Lectures]: Introduction to Verilog-A, Basic functions and statements, User defined functions and 
systems tasks, Basic analog designs using Verilog-A. 
 
Lab Experiments on algorithmic level design implementation, basic floorplanning and routing, High-level 
power estimation algorithms, Automation of Analog Circuit Design, Complex analog circuit design using 
optimization techniques, Verilog-A programming. 
 
Text Books 
1. Gerez,S.H., Algorithms for VLSI Design Automation. Wiley, 1998. 
2. Sait,S.M., and Youssef,H., VLSI Physical Design Automation. World Scientific Publishing Company, 1999. 
3. Fakhfakh,M., Esteban,T.-C., Siarry,P., Computational Intelligence in Analog and Mixed-Signal (AMS) and 

Radio-Frequency (RF) Circuit Design. Springer 2015. 
4. Kundert,K.S., Zinke,O., The Designer’s Guide to Verilog-AMS. Springer, June 2004. 
 
Preparatory course material 
1. Kamakoti,V., and Balachandran,S., CAD for VLSI, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Computer 

Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras,      
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106088/ 

2. Barros,M.F.M., Guilherme,J.M.C., Horta,N.C.G., Analog Circuits and Systems Optimization based on 
Evolutionary Computation Techniques. Springer, 2010. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

56 
 



Title Sensors and Actuators Number EE4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [E] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. 4th Year Type Elective Course 
Prerequisite Material Science and Engg., Semiconductor Devices,   

Analog circuits 
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Make the students know about different types of sensors and materials for sensors 
2. Use concepts for converting physical parameter into an electrical quantity 
3. Explain sensor parameters, different packaging types and readout circuitry 
4. Show and explain examples of sensors relevant to the industry 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
5. Identify the commercial and most used sensors in the industry 
6. Understand the underlying sensing phenomena used in sensors 
7. Develop a synthesis process and characterize a sensor on their own 
8. Test and examine the sensor functioning and comprehend as to what needs to be developed 
 
Contents   
Introduction to Sensors and Actuators [10 Lectures]:  
Different types of sensors, classification of transducers (6L) 
Structure of a transducer and types of transducers (Fluidic actuators, Piezoelectric and piezoresistive 
actuators etc.) (4L) 
Materials for sensors [6 Lectures]: Introduction to nanostructured materials, metal oxides, quantum dots, 2D 
materials 
Parameters and characteristics of Sensors and Transducers [6 Lectures]: Sensor parameters like sensitivity, 
selectivity, response- and recovery time, stability, ageing, repeatability, drift, calibration 
MEMS and transducers [6 Lectures]: MEMS structural elements, scaling advantages, transduction pathways, 
examples of electromechanical transduction 
Different packaging for Sensors [4 Lectures]: Premould packaging, Moulded interconnect devices, Hermetic 
packaging, Wafer level packaging  
Sensors readouts [5 Lectures]: Basic circuitry to read the data from sensors, Basic circuitry to read the data 
from sensors (noise, instrumentation amplifiers etc.) 
Current trends in Sensing applications [5 Lectures]: Few examples of current sensors used in the industry and 
commercial sensors will be discussed 
                                   
Textbook  
1. Silva C. W. de, (2016), Sensors and Actuators, CRC Press 
2. Zhang S., Li L., Kumar A., (2009), Materials Characterization Technique, CRC Press 
3. Eggins B. R., (2007), Chemical Sensors and Biosensors, Wiley 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Research articles such as ACS Nano Letters, IEEE Sensors, ACS Sensors, ACS Nano, Sensors & actuators B 
etc.  

  

57 
 



Title Physics and Modeling of MOS Transistor  Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Physical Electronics   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide in-depth understanding of the modeling of semiconductor devices  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the operation and modeling of MOS transistor 
2. Develop models for novel semiconductor devices. 
 
Contents  
Fundamentals [8 Lectures]: 
Intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors, fermi and quasi fermi-level, charge-density, electric field and potential 
(4 Lectures), Gauss’s law and Poisson’s equation, mobility and scattering mechanism, drift and diffusion (4 
Lectures)  
Two Terminal MOS Cap [10 Lectures]: 
 Flatband voltage, potential and charge balance, accumulation/depletion/inversion (5 Lectures) 
 Weak/moderate/strong inversion, high and low frequency capacitance (5 Lectures) 
MOS Transistors [15 Lectures]:  
Three terminal MOS transistor, body effect (5 Lectures) 
 Four terminal MOS transistor, effect of drain voltage, transport: mobility, series resistance, impact of doping, 
capacitance behavior (5 Lectures) 
Scaling, leakage current, impact ionization, short channel effects and optimization strategies (5 Lectures) 
Noise and Equivalent Circuit [6 Lectures]:  
Flicker, thermal and shot noise. Small signal equivalent circuit (3 Lectures) 
Non-linearity and harmonic distortion, Non-quasi static effect (3 Lectures) 
Nanoelectronics: Challenges and future prospective (3 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks  
1. Y. Tsividis. Operation and Modeling of the MOS Transistor. Oxford University Press; 3rd edition, 2010. 
2. C. Hu, Modern Semiconductor Devices for Integrated Circuits. Pearson, 2009.  
3. D. Neamen, Semiconductor Physics And Devices. McGraw Hill Education; 4th edition, 2017. 
 
Self Learning Material  
Prof. Karmalkar, Semiconductor Device Modeling, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electronics & 
Communications Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/106/117106033/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
Prof. Karmalkar course, Solid State Devices, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electronics & 
Communications Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117/106/117106091/ 

  

58 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Computing Systems 
  

59 
 



Title Real Time Systems Number EEXX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite Computer Architecture, Embedded System   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Describe real-time systems and how real-time resource management algorithms and mechanisms to meet 

application timing constraints. 
2. Explain how to conduct real-time schedulability analysis. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Use RTOS for different applications 
2. Design system to meet different real time constraints in uniprocessor and multiprocessor Environment.  
 
Contents:  
Introduction of real time systems [4 Lectures]: Types of time constraints; definition of scheduling, examples of 
real time systems  
Periodic Task Scheduling [6 Lectures]:  
Timeline scheduling;Rate Monotonic scheduling; Earliest Deadline First (4L)  
Deadline Monotonic EDF with constrained deadlines (2L) 
Aperiodic task scheduling [4 Lectures]:  
Jackson’s algorithm; Horn’s algorithm; Non-preemptive scheduling (2L) 
Scheduling with precedence constraints (2L) 
Fixed-priority servers [7 Lectures]:  
Background scheduling; Polling Server Deferrable Server; Priority Exchange Sporadic Server (4L)  
Slack stealing Non-existence of optimal servers; Performance evaluation (3L) 
Dynamic priority servers [6 Lectures]:  
Dynamic Priority Exchange Server; Dynamic Sporadic Server; Total Bandwidth Server; Earliest Deadline Late 
Server; Improved Priority Exchange Server (4L) 
Improving TBS; Performance evaluation; The Constant Bandwidth Server (2L) 
Limited pre-emptive scheduling [6 Lectures]:  
Non-preemptive scheduling; Preemption thresholds (4L) 
Deferred Preemptions; Task splitting (2L) 
Real-time operating systems and Standards Standards for real-time operating systems; Commercial real-time 
systems; [6 Lectures]  
Linux related real-time kernels; Open-source real-time research kernels [3 Lectures] 
 
Textbooks  
1. G. C. Buttazzo (2011), 2/e, Hard Real Time Computing Systems; Springer.    
2. Phillip A. Laplante (2004), 3/e, Real Time Systems Analysis and Design, IEEE Press. 
   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

60 
 



Course Title Reconfigurable Computing Number EEL4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite Digital Design   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to learn the concepts of reconfigurable computing. 
2. Provide exposure to the students about reconfigurable architectures and their programming for system level 

designs. 
 

Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply principles of reconfigurable computing for digital system design. 
2. Implement the basic computing architectures using reconfigurable computing platforms.  
 
Contents: 
Reconfigurable Computing: Introduction to Reconfigurable Computing, Need of Reconfigurable Computing, 
Historical perspective in terms of system design. (3 Lectures) 
Reconfigurable Architectures: Introduction to Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) Technology, FPGA 
Arithmetic, Applications. (4 Lectures) 
The Systolic Model, Runtime Reconfigurable Architectures: PipeRench. (3 Lectures)  
Runtime Reconfigurable Architectures: Multi-Context, Function-Unit Architectures. (4 Lectures) 
Reconfigurable Programming: Logic Emulation Architectures, Programming Reconfigurable Computers, Logic 
Cell and Datapath Mapping. (4 Lectures) 
Behavioral Synthesis, Hardware/Software Co-design, Systolic Loop Transformations. (5 Lectures) 
Software Pipelining, Retiming, Module Generators. (5 Lectures) 
Reconfigurable Designs: Placement, Routing, Dynamically Reconfigurable Adaptive Viterbi Decoder. (4 
Lectures)  
Network Virtualization using Reconfigurable Hardware, Security for Reconfigurable Hardware in the Cloud, 
Partitioning. (5 Lectures)  
High Level Compilation, Power Reduction Techniques, Soft GPGPUs on an FPGA, Hybrid FPGA Networks-
on-Chip. (5 Lectures) 

Text Books 
1. Bobada,C, Introduction to Reconfigurable Computing. 1st edition, Springer, 2007. 
2. Cardoso,J. and Hubner,M., Reconfigurable Computing. Springer-Verlag, 2011. 
 
Preparatory course material 
1. Tessier,R., Pocek,K. and DeHon,A., "Reconfigurable Computing Architectures,"  Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 

103, no. 3, pp. 332-354, March 2015. 
2. Todman,T.,J. et al., "Reconfigurable computing: architectures and design methods,", IEE Proceedings - 

Computers and Digital Techniques, vol. 152, no. 2, pp. 193-207, March 2005. 
  

61 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Power Engineering 
  

62 
 



Title Power System Analysis and Stability Number EE4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Electrical Machines, Power Engineering   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide the capability to understand and analyze various phenomena associated with power systems both 
under steady state and transients 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Model the power system and determine various parameters, system status during normal and abnormal 
conditions 
 
Contents  
Load flow studies [10 Lectures]: Load flow problem: Ybus formulation (1L), Gauss-Seidel (5L), Newton- Raphson 
methods (3L), and decoupled power flow (1L) 
Short circuit studies [12 Lectures]: Zbus formulation (2L), symmetrical and unsymmetrical faults, symmetrical 
components and sequence networks (5L), analysis of symmetrical and unsymmetrical faults (5L) 
Power system stability [6 Lectures]: Definitions of stability problems, types of stability issues, swing equation, and 
swing curve, transient and small signal stability analysis of a single machine infinite bus system (5L), solution 
for swing equation (1L) 
Power system monitoring and protection [8 Lectures]: Current and potential transformers, introduction to SCADA, 
synchro-phasors (PMU) (3L), introduction to protective relaying, types of relays and introduction to circuit 
breakers (5L) 
Power system transients [6 Lectures]: Traveling waves and propagation of surges, overvoltage, lightning (5L), 
neutral grounding (1L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Stevenson,W.D.Jr., (1982), Elements of Power System Analysis, 4th Edition, McGraw Hill International 
2. Wadhwa,C.L., (2010), Electrical Power Systems, 6th Edition, New Age International Publishers 
3. Kothari,D.P., Nagrath,I.J., (2008), Power System Engineering, 2nd Edition, McGraw Hill Education (India) 

Private Limited 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Sinha, A.K.,  Power System Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT 

Kharagpur, 
       https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/105/108105067/ 
1. Das, D., Power System Analysis, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT 

Kharagpur 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117105140/ 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

63 
 



Title Power System Operation and Control Number EE4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Electrical Machines, Power Engineering,   

Power System Analysis and Stability 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide fundamentals of operation and control strategies needed for economic, efficient and reliable operation 
of power system 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Understand and develop methods to optimize generation scheduling and maintain security of a power system 
 
Contents  
Characteristics of power generation units [5 Lectures]: Operational and economical aspects of thermal units, 
combined cycle units, nuclear units and hydro units  
Economic dispatch [3 Lectures]: Definition of economic dispatch problem and various methods of economic 
dispatch  
Transmission losses [3 Lectures]: Incremental losses and penalty factors, B matrix loss formula 
Unit commitment [5 Lectures]: Introduction to unit commitment, constraints in unit commitment, unit 
commitment methods with and without constraints  
Hydrothermal coordination [5 Lectures]: Hydroelectric plant models, hydrothermal coordination, methods of 
hydro-scheduling  
Active power generation control [5 Lectures]:Modeling of generator, governor, prime mover and tie-line, automatic 
generation control in single area and multiarea power system  
Power system security [5 Lectures]: Factors affecting power system security, contingency analysis, sensitivity 
factors  
State estimation in power system [5 Lectures]: State estimation methods- weighted least squares, orthogonal 
decomposition, applications of state estimation  
Optimal power flow [6 Lectures]: Solution of optimal power flow, sensitivity analysis (3L), security constrained 
optimal power flow (3L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Wood,A.J., Wollenberg,B.F., (2011), Power Generation, Operation and Control, Wiley-India edition 
2. Wadhwa,C.L., (2010), Electrical Power Systems, 6th Edition, New Age International Publishers. 
3. Kothari,D.P., Nagrath,I.J., (2009), Modern Power System Analysis, 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw Hill Education 

Private Limited 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Das,D.,  Power System Engineering, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 

Institute of Technology Kharagpur,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105104/   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

64 
 



Title Power Electronics Number EE4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Physical Electronics   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide fundamentals of power electronic circuits and applications 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Design and analyze various types of converter circuits for applications in AC as well as DC circuits 
 
Contents  
Review of power electronic switches: Review of diode, BJT, MOSFET, IGBT as switching devices (2 lectures) 
Controlled rectifiers: SCR switching circuits, protection, series and parallel operation (2 lectures), single phase 
controlled rectifiers with R, R-L, R-L-E load, effect of source inductance (3 lectures), three phase rectifiers (3 
lectures), dual converters, power factor, and harmonics in single phase and three phase rectifiers (2 lectures) 
AC voltage controller: Principle of ON-OFF and phase control (2 lecture), single phase and three phase controllers 
(3 lectures), cycloconverter (2 lectures) 
DC-DC converters: Step-up and step-down converters with various type of loads (2 lectures), buck, boost, buck-
boost and cuk regulators, isolated DC-DC converters (5 lectures) 
Power Supplies: Introduction to switched-mode, resonant and bidirectional AC and DC power supplies (4 
lectures) 
Inverters: Principle of operation, single-phase and three-phase bridge inverter, 120° and 180° conduction (5 
lectures), PWM inverters, current source inverters, space-vector-modulation (5 lectures) 
Other converter topologies: PWM rectifiers, dual active bridge topology, introduction to multilevel inverters (2 
lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Rashid,M.H., (2004), Power Electronics Circuits, Devices, and Applications, 3rd Edition, Pearson Education Inc. 
2. Hart,D.W., (2011), Power Electronics, Tata McGraw-Hill Education Private Limited. 
3. Mohan,N., (2007), First Course on Power Electronics and Drives, MNPERE. 
 
Self Learning Material 
Bhuvaneswari,G.,  Power Electronics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/102/108102145/  
     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

65 
 



Title Industrial Drives Number EE4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Electrical Machines, Power Electronics   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide an understanding of the various AC and DC drives along with the various converter topologies used 
and their control used in industry 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Design and develop various power electronic drives along with their control 
 
Contents  
Fundamentals of electric drives: Factors affecting selection of drives, speed-torque characteristics of motors and 
loads, characteristics and operating modes of drive motors (3 lectures), starting, braking and speed control of 
motors, 4 quadrant drives (3 lectures) 
DC motor drives: Characteristics, starting methods, braking methods, speed control using converters and 
choppers (5 lectures), full converter, semi converter and dual converter fed DC drives (3 lectures) 
Three phase induction motor drives: Starting methods, braking methods, speed control of cage rotor induction 
machines using AC voltage controllers, voltage-source and current-source inverters (5 lectures), V-by-f control 
and other control techniques, speed control of wound-rotor induction machines, slip-power recovery scheme 
(5 lectures), field oriented control and direct torque control of AC motors (2 lectures) 
Three phase synchronous motor drives: Starting methods, braking methods (5 lectures), speed control methods (3 
lectures) 
Special machines and their drives: Permanent magnet brush-less motor drives, permanent magnet synchronous 
motor drives (3 lectures), stepper, reluctance motor drives and AC and DC traction drives (5 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Dubey,G.K., (2001), Fundamentals of Electrical Drives, 2nd Edition, Alpha Science International Ltd 
2.  De,N.K., Sen,P.K., (1999), Electrical Drives, Prentice Hall of India Pvt Ltd 
3.  Vas,P., (1998), Sensorless Vector and Direct Torque Control, Oxford University Press 
 
Self Learning Material 
Das,S.P., Fundamentals of Electric Drives, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104140/   
     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

66 
 



Title Measurement and Instrumentation Number EEL3XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Introduction to Electrical Engineering   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide an understanding of the constructional details and principle of operation of basic measuring 
instruments 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Understand the operation of various measuring devices and choose the appropriate measuring device for 
measurement of different parameters 
 
Contents  
Measurement of Electrical Quantities: Voltmeter, ammeter, and ohmmeter, moving coil instruments (3 lectures), 
moving iron instruments, AC and DC measurements (4 lectures) 
Power and Energy Measurement: DC and AC power measurement, low power factor wattmeter, power 
measurement in three-phase circuits (3 lectures), reactive power measurement, energy meters, theory and 
operation, compensation, power factor meter (4 lectures) 
Instrument Transformers: Current and potential transformers (5 lectures) 
Measurement of Electrical Elements: Measurement of medium, low and high resistances (3 lectures), AC bridges, 
inductance and capacitance measurement (4lectures) 
Electronic Measurements: Electronic instruments for current, voltage and power measurement (5 lectures), 
Cathode ray oscilloscope, frequency and phase angle measurements using CRO spectrum (3 lectures) 
Instrumentation: Transducers, classification & selection of transducers, strain gauges, inductive & capacitive 
transducers (4 lectures), piezoelectric and Hall-effect transducers, thermistor, thermocouple, encoder (4 
lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Shawney,A.K., (2007), A Course in Electrical and Electronic Measurements and Instrumentation, 18th edition, 

Dhanpat Rai & Co. (P) Ltd. 
2. Helfrick,A.D., Cooper,W.D., (2015), Modern Electronic Instrumentation & Measurement Techniques, Pearson 

Education India 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

67 
 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Specializations 

  

68 
 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Communication Engineering Specialization 

  

69 
 



Title Wireless Communications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree (Comm. Engg.) Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite Fundamentals of Communications   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide students an understanding of the concepts related to communication over wireless fading channel. 
2.  Expose students to concepts and techniques for exploiting fading and application of these concepts in 

multiuser communication systems context. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand concepts related to deep fade, diversity techniques and channel capacity for point-to-point 

wireless communications systems. 
2. Analyze multi-user networks and understanding of techniques like opportunistic communication, 

multiuser diversity, superposition coding and successive interference cancellation. 
3. Analyze and design wireless ad-hoc networks with special emphasis on energy constrained networks 
 
Contents  
Wireless Channels [10 Lectures]:  
Review of signal detection over AWGN channels and M-ary Modulation (5L) 
Modelling of wireless channels; space, time and frequency channel coherence; input/output channel models 
for single and multi-antenna systems (5L) 
Diversity Techniques [12 Lectures]:  
Digital modulation and its performance in fading (4L) 
Deep fade and diversity (3L) 
Realizing diversity: time diversity, frequency diversity, antenna diversity (5L) 
Wireless Channel Capacity [10 Lectures]:  
Capacity of the Gaussian channels (2L) 
Outage limited and ergodic capacity of fading channels (4L) 
Waterfillingalgorithm and opportunistic communication (4L) 
Multiuser system design [10 Lectures]:  
Multiple access and random access techniques (5L) 
Multiuser channel capacity and multiuser diversity (5L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Tse, D. and Viswanath, P., (2005), Fundamentals of wireless communication, Cambridge University Press. 
2.  Goldsmith, A., (2005), Wireless Communications, Cambridge University Press. 
3.  Simon, M. K. and Alouini, M. S., (2004), Digital communication over fading channels, John Wiley and Sons. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Zheng, L., Principles of Wireless Communications, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical Engineering & 

Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-
engineering-and-computer-science/6-452-principles-of-wireless-communications-spring-2006/index.htm 

Preparatory Course Material  
Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Communication II, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering,       Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70 
 



Title Digital Communications: Hands-on  Number EEP7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P[C] 1–0–2 [2] 
Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech. Type Core 
Prerequisite Communication Systems   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide students with hands-on exposure towards the design and implementation of digital communication 
systems using software defined radio technology.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design communications systems by assessing the design trade-offs and real-world communication 

requirements 
2.  Utilize fundamental communication techniques such as CDMA and multicarrier modulation like OFDM for 

the current and future wireless networks relevant to industry needs.   
 
Contents  
Lecture: 
Introduction to programmable hardware, Software Architecture, USRP hardware, signal processing chain, channel 
modeling, estimation and equalization, fading and diversity, carrier and symbol synchronization, multicarrier 
modulation, CDMA 
 
Laboratory: 
Lab 1: Setting up the programmable hardware to transmit and receive signals 
Lab 2: Estimating signal power, noise power, the power spectrum, and the bandwidth of 
Signals 
Lab 3: Sampling, aliasing, interpolation, resampling, upsampling, and downsampling 
Lab 4: Dealing with narrowband channel impairments: synchronization and channel 
estimation 
Lab 5: Implementation of a transmitter and receiver using programmable hardware 
Lab 6-7: Receiver Structure & Waveform Synthesis of a Transmitter and a Receiver 
Lab 8-9: Implementation of multicarrier modulation like OFDM and synchronization using programmable 
hardware 
Lab 10: Implementation of Spectrum Sensing Techniques 
Lab 11-14: Term project 
 
Textbook  
Pu, D. and Wyglinski, A. M. (2013), Digital Communication System Engineering with Software-Defined Radio, 1st 
Edition, Artech House 
 
Self Learning Material  
Wyglinski, A. M.,  Software Defined Radio Systems and Analysis, Online Course Material, Department of Electrical 
and Computer Engineering, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, 
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLBfTSoOqoRnOTBTLahXBlxaDUNWdZ3FdS 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

71 
 



Title UAV Assisted Wireless Networks  Number EEL7XX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech., M. Tech and Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Wireless Communications   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide a comprehensive overview of wireless communication and networking with UAVs.   

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Perform channel modeling for UAV-BSs and UAV-UEs, design and optimization of their deployment, 
trajectory, multiple access, and resource management. 
 
Contents  
UAV Applications and Use Cases [5 lectures]:IoT systems, Wireless backhauling for ground systems, three-
dimensional MIMO 
Basic Theoretical Background [10 Lectures]:  
Aerial channel modelling and waveform design (5L) 
Network architectures, disruption-tolerant airborne network protocols (5L) 
UAV Assisted Cellular Communications [18 Lectures]:  
Deployment of UAV base stations for optimized coverage (5L) 
UAV network modelling (5L) 
Downlink performance analysis for UAV base station (5L) 
Resource management(3L) 
Cellular Assisted UAV Sensing [9 Lectures]: 
Cooperative communication in UAV networks (5L) 
Security of UAV UEs (4L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Namuduri, K., Chaumette, S., Kim, J., and Sterbenz, J., (2017), UAV Networks and Communications, 

Cambridge University Press 
2. Saad, W., Bennis, M., Mozaffari, M., and Lin, X., (2020), Wireless Communications and Networking for 

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, Cambridge University Press 
 
Self Learning Material  
Best Readings in UAV Assisted Wireless Networks, IEEE 
 https://www.comsoc.org/publications/best-readings/uav-assisted-wireless-networks 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Communication II, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/ 

 
 
 
  

72 
 



Title Optical Signal Processing Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Semiconductor Physics, Electromagnetism and   

Optics 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the basics of nonlinearities in optical devices and how they can be harnessed for processing of 

light waves. 
2. Explain the working, modeling and characterization of various optical signal processing devices along with 

their advantages and limitations. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design, characterize and analyze basic optical signal processing circuits. 
2. Appreciate the advantages of optical signal processing over conventional electronic signal processing 

techniques. 
 
Contents  
Nonlinear Optics for Signal Processing [8 Lectures]:  
Nonlinear optical susceptibility, time-domain description of optical nonlinearities (4L),  
Kramers-Kronig relations, intensity dependent refractive index of materials (4L) 
Third Order Nonlinearities [18 Lectures]:  
Theory and modeling of Optical Kerr Effect (2L),  
Self Phase Modulation and Cross Phase Modulation processes (4L),  
Optical phase conjugation, Four Wave Mixing and Third Harmonic Generation (5L), 
Photon-phonon interaction, Stimulated Brillouin, Raman and Rayleigh scattering (5L),  
Two Photon Absorption (2L)  
Optical Signal Processing Devices [16 Lectures]:  
Optical Fourier Transform (2L),  
Optical correlators (2L), 
Pulse compression, pulse shaping (4L), 
Optical interconnects (2L),  
Multiplexers, mixers, wavelength conversion (4L), 
Tunable optical delay (2L)  
 
Textbooks  
1. Boyd, R. W., (2013), Nonlinear optics. Elsevier. 
2. Dragoman D., and Dragoman M. (2013), Advanced optoelectronic devices. Vol. 1. Springer Science and Business 

Media.. 
3. Saleh, B.E.A, and Teich M.C., (1991), Fundamentals of photonics. Vol. 22. New York: Wiley. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Singh B.P and Rustagi K.C., Nonlinear Optics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Physics, Indian Institute 
of Technology Bombay,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115/101/115101008/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Roy S., Introduction toNonlinear Optics and its Applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Physics, 
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115/105/115105105/ 
 

 
  

73 
 



Title Optical Networks Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M.Tech,Ph.D Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basics of Fiber Optic communications   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce elements and components of an optical networking solution. 
2. Explore the capabilities and limitations of different network topologies. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify the required network technology for a given requirement. 
2. Solve WDM network design problems. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Optical Networks: Types of traffic, Services, Optical packet and circuit switching, Optical Layered 
Architecture. Optical Network elements [5 lectures] 
Local Area Network: Network topologies, Multiplexing and Multiple access techniques [4 lectures], Network 
resource sharing, Network capacity, Protocols. [4 lectures] 
Optical Access Networks: Passive Network Topology, PON architecture [3 lectures], Multi point control protocol, 
Dynamic bandwidth allocation, FTTx networks [5 lectures] 
Metropolitan and Wide Area Networks: SONET/SDH, Optical Transport Network [3 lectures], Wavelength 
Routing Network, Routing and Assignment Algorithm. [5 lectures] 
Network Control, Management and Survivability: Network management system architecture, Functionality, 
GMPLS [3 lectures], Impairment, Survivability, Protection and Restoration. [5 lectures] 
Free-Space Optical Networks: Classification, FSO network topologies, Design factors, FSO Network 
applications. [5 Lectures] 
 
Textbooks 
1. Chadha D. (2019), Optical WDM networks: from static to elastic networks, Wiley-IEEE Press. 
2. Grobe K. and Eiselt M. (2013), Wavelength Division Multiplexing, A Practical Engineering Guide, Wiley. 
3. Ramaswami R., Sivarajan K.N. and Sasaki G.H. (2010), Optical Networks: A Practical Perspective, 3rd Edition, 

Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Keiser G. (2013), Fibre Optic Communication, McGraw-Hill, 5th Edition. 

 
 
  

74 
 



Title Optical Techniques for Communications Number EE-4XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basic EM Theory   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Introduce light propagation methods and techniques such as OAM Multiplexing, spatial filtering and 
Holography useful for future communication systems. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Work with optical components and design basic optical setups such as a free-space optical link, interferometer, 
beam analysis, imaging and Holography. 

Course Content 
Propagation Techniques: Ray propagation through optical components (mirrors, lenses, beam splitters) [4 
lectures], Propagation characteristics of Gaussian, LG and HG beams [5 lectures], OAM content, OAM 
generation, OAM Data multiplexing [3 lectures]. 
Interferometry and Holography: Coherence, Michelson and Mach-Zehnder Interferometer, Polarization concepts 
[4 lectures]. Optical Fourier Transform, Diffraction, 4-f Imaging system, Spatial filtering [4 lectures]. 
Holographic recording and reconstruction, Recording material [5 lectures], Holographic Interferometry [3 
lectures] 

Lab Experiments will be conducted on collimation, beam expansion, beam analysis, interference 
phenomenon and applications, polarization effects, Imaging and Hologram generation. 

Textbooks  
1. Saleh, B. E. A., and Teich, M. C., (2007) Fundamentals of Photonics, John Wiley & Sons. 
2. Thomas K., (2005), Handbook of holographic interferometry- optical and digital methods, Wiley-VCH. 
3. Hariharan P., (2002) Basics of Holography, Cambridge University Press. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Bhattacharya S., Optical Engineering, NPTEL, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/106/108106161/ 

  

75 
 



Title RF system design for Communications Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. - Year Type Elective  
Prerequisite Engineering Electromagnetics, Microwave Circuits   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Familiarize behavior of cascaded blocks in RF system and effect of specification of blocks on system 

performance  
2. Provide basic understanding about behavior of intermodulation products, spurious responses 
3. Provide basic understanding of linearity of a system 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Formulate and analyse system specification to control gain requirement, noise figure of the system.  
2. Obtain basic understanding of linearity of a cascade from specifications on its modules.  
3. Obtain basic understanding of the spurious responses in a conversion scheme  
 
Contents  
Introduction to Wireless Circuit Design: Radio Channel and modulation requirements, bits, symbols and 
waveforms, wireless system building blocks, system specification and their relation to circuit design- system 
noise and noise floor, System amplitude and phase behaviour, introduction to MIC- amplifier & oscillator (5 
lectures) 
Gain:S, T and X parameter, Module Gain, Overall Response, Standard Cascade, Bilateral Modules(4 lectures) 
Interconnections:Lossy Interconnections, Nonstandard Impedances, Sensitivities(3 lectures) 
Noise Figure: Noise Factor and Noise Figure, Cascaded module- applicable gain & noise figure, Impedance-
Dependent Noise Factors, Image Noise-Mixers, Extreme Mismatch-Voltage Amplifiers, Gain Controls(5 
lectures) 
Nonlinearity: Representing Nonlinear Responses, 2nd and 3rd order terms, Frequency Dependence, Cascades-
intermodulation products (IM) Adding Coherently and randomly (4 lectures) 
Intermodulation:Anomalous IMs, Measuring IMs, Intermodulation of Noise, Composite Distortion, optimizing 
cascades(4 lectures) 
Linearity improving architecture: Parallel Combining- hybrid, push-pull, Combiner Trees, Feedback, 
Feedforward - Intermods and Harmonics, Nonideal Performance(5 lectures) 
Contaminating Signals: Frequency conversion basics, Spurs, Two-Signal IMs, Hard& soft Limiting(3 lectures) 
Mixer:Mixers Through the LO Port - AM Suppression, FM Transfer, Single-Sideband Transfer, Mixing Between 
LO Components(4 lectures) 
Phase noise- Jitter, Receiver Desensitization, Sources of Phase Noise, Processing Phase Noise in a Cascade, 
Determining the Effect on Data(5 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. William Egan, (2003), Practical RF System Design, by William Egan, 6th Edition, John Wiley & Sons  
2. Ulrich L. Rohde, David P. Newkirk, (2000), RF/ Microwave Circuit design for wireless applications, John 

Wiley & Sons 
 
Self Learning Material  
Kumar P., RF Integrated Circuits, Department of EE, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117102012/# 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
Bhattacharjee R., Microwave Engineering, Department of EEE, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, 
https://swayam.gov.in/nd1_noc19_ee68/preview 

 
 
 
 
 

76 
 



Title RADAR Engineering Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. ,M.Tech. Type Elective course 
Prerequisite Basics of RF circuits, Fundamentals of   

Communication Systems  
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Teach the fundamentals RADAR. 
2.  Teach building blocks and different types of RADAR.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the building blocks and working principles of RADAR.  
 
Contents   
Introduction: Working principle, RADAR range equations, maximum unambiguous range, pulse repetition 
frequency, radar block diagram.     (5 lectures) 
Detection: Probability of detection, False alarm, radar cross section of targets.                                  (3 lectures) 
Types of RADAR:Pulse radars and CW radars, MTI RADAR, Doppler effect, delay-line cancellers, blind speeds.   
(5 lectures) 
Moving target and tracking: Moving target detector, limitations of MTI, tracking with radar, monopulse tracking, 
conical scan.       (5 lectures) 
RADAR measurements: RADAR measurement and accuracy, Range and velocity ambiguities, the ambiguity 
diagram.    (4 lectures) 
Pulse shaping: Pulse compression-principles, matched filter, chirp waveforms.  (4 lectures)  
Clutter: Descriptions of land & sea clutter, detection of targets in clutter. (4 lectures) 
RADAR antenna: Requirements of RADAR antenna, antenna parameters, reflector antennas, scanning phased 
array antennas, diplexing antenna.  (5 lectures) 
RADAR receiver:  Receiver architecture, heterodyne receiver, noise figure. (4 lectures) Transmitter: Transmitter 
architecture, isolation between transmitter and receiver, duplexers. (3 lectures)    
 
Textbook  
1. Skolnik M.I., (2017), Introduction to RADAR systems, 3rd Ed., McGraw Hill. 
2. Richards M.A., (2005), Fundamentals of RADAR signal processing, Indian Ed., McGraw Hill. 
3. Carpentier M.H., (1988), Principles of modern RADAR systems, Artech house publishers. 
 
Self Learning Material  
O'Donnell R.M. , Introduction to RADAR systems, MIT open course, MIT Lincoln Laboratory,   
https://ocw.mit.edu/resources/res-ll-001-introduction-to-radar-systems-spring-2007/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

77 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Intelligent Communication and Networking Specialization 
 
 
  

78 
 



Title Design and Analysis of Communication Networks Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Data and Computer Communications, Signals and   

Systems 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide in-depth understanding of communication network analysis, modeling and simulation techniques. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Analyse and evaluate communication networks using analytical and simulation-based methods including 

traffic models, graph models and mobility models.  
2. Design and program software components for network simulations and analysis. 
 
Contents  
Probabilistic models for communication systems [10 Lectures]: 
Linear System with Random process Input (4L) 
LTI System with WSS Process Input, point-to-point communications link (2L) 
multi-point links, random and multiple access techniques (4L) 
Modelling and Analysis of Communication Networks [16 Lectures]: 
Random number generation, mobility models (3L) 
Channel models, topology models, graph theory and algorithms (5L) 
Queuing models, queuing networks (5L) 
Network calculus (3L) 
Simulation of Communication Networks [16 Lectures]:  
Discrete event-based simulation (3L) 
Monte-carlo simulation(4L) 
Rate-based simulation (3L) 
Analysis of simulation results, statistical analysis (4L)  
Visualization of results (2L) 

Lab Experiments will be conducted on traffic modeling, link-level, system-level, packet level simulation, 
SW/HW in the loop. 

Textbooks  
1. Srikant, R.  and Ying, L., (2014), Communication Networks: An Optimization, Control and Stochastic 

Networks Perspective , Cambridge University Press. 
2. Kumar, A., Manjunath, D. and Kuri, J., (2004), Communication Networking: An Analytical Approach, 

Morgan Kaufman Series in Networking, (an imprint of Elsevier Science) 
3. Bonald, T. and Feuillet, M., (2011), Network Performance Analysis, Wiley.  
 
Reference Book 
Law, A. M., (2015), Simulation Modeling and Analysis, Fifth Edition, McGraw-Hill. 
 
Self Learning Material 
Scalable Wireless Ad-hoc Network Simulator, http://jist.ece.cornell.edu/index.html 
   
Preparatory Material 
Modiano, E.,  Data Communication Networks, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical Engineering & Computer 
Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-
computer-science/6-263j-data-communication-networks-fall-2002/index.htm 
 

 
 
 

79 
 



Title Intelligent Radio Networks Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering/ Computer Science and L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 

Engineering 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Data   

and Computer Communications 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide understanding of the intricacies involved in making intelligent and cognitive radios work. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Use intelligent techniques to address the challenges and trade-offs in cognitive radio networks  
 
Contents  
Introduction to Software defined radios (SDR) [6 lectures]:  
Spectrum scarcity, Spectrum white space, Fixed spectrum allocation [3L], 
Software defined radio (SDR), Limitations of SDR [3L]. 
Cognitive radios [6 lectures]:  
Introduction, Evolution, Concept, Dynamic spectrum access, Cognitive cycle [3L], 
Functions, spectrum sensing, spectrum management, spectrum mobility, Cognitive radio architecture [3L]. 
Software Defined Networking [10 lectures]: 
Evolution, operation, applications [5L], 
Open flow specifications, network function virtualization [5L]. 
Cognitive Radio Networking [15 lectures]:  
MAC layer for CRN, routing models in CRN [5L], 
Cross layer considerations: impact on upper layer protocol design, trade-offs[10L]. 
Intelligent radio and Intelligent Radio Networking [10 lectures]: 
Intelligent techniques for spectrum sensing, spectrum access and spectrum sharing [5L], 
Use of AI and ML in network management, applications and services [5L]. 
 
Laboratory: 
Introduction to MATLAB, GNU Radio and USRP platform, Simulate CR/IR network in MATLAB, Centralized 
cooperative spectrum sensing in CRN using ns3, Experiments with WiFi based WLAN MAC protocols 
 
Textbooks  
1. Xiao, Y., and Hu, F. (2008), Cognitive radio networks, 1st Edition, CRC press. 
2. Göransson, P., Black, C. and Culver, T. (2016), Software Defined Networks: A Comprehensive Approach, 2nd 

Edition, Morgan Kauffman. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. Rawat, M.,  Basics of Software Defined Radio and Practical Applications, NPTEL Course Material, Department 

of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/107/108107107/ 

2. K. B. Letaief, W. Chen, Y. Shi, J. Zhang and Y. A. Zhang, "The Roadmap to 6G: AI Empowered Wireless 
Networks," IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 84-90, August 2019. 

3. Relevant recent research papers in the field. 
   
Preparatory Material 
Modiano, E., Data Communication Networks, MIT OpenCourseWare, Electrical Engineering & Computer 
Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-
computer-science/6-263j-data-communication-networks-fall-2002/index.htm 

 
 
 
 

80 
 



Title Computation Oriented Communications  Number EEL7XX 
Department Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Engineering 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Data and   

Computer Communications 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Introduce the area of computation oriented communications   
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Design communication networks for federated learning 
 
Contents  
Resources for Communication networks for distributed computing [6 Lectures] 
Federated Learning [6 Lectures] 
Edge Intelligence and distributed computation [6 Lectures] 
Rate-latency-reliability tradeoff[6 Lectures] 
Network Intelligence [6 Lectures] 
Communication network design and implementation for federated learning [6 Lectures] 
Application aware communication for IoT devices [6 Lectures] 
 
Textbook  
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Konečný J., McMahan, H.B., Yu, F. X., Richtarik, P., Suresh, A. T., and Bacon, D., Federated Learning: 

Strategies for Improving Communication Efficiency, NIPS Workshop on Private Multi-Party Machine 
Learning 2016. 

2. Bennis, M., Debbah, M. and Poor, H. V., "Ultrareliable and Low-Latency Wireless Communication: Tail, Risk, 
and Scale," in Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 106, no. 10, pp. 1834-1853, Oct. 2018 

3. Machine Learning For Communications Emerging Technologies Initiative, IEEE 
    https://mlc.committees.comsoc.org/research-library/ 
 

  

81 
 



Title Machine Learning for Communications  Number EEL7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M.Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Data and   

Computer Communications 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Introduce the area of machine learning in the context of communications   
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Apply machine learning techniques to various signal processing requirements for communications including 
channel estimation, automatic modulation classification and iterative channel decoding. 
 
Contents  
Channel estimation and prediction [14 Lectures]:  
Adaptive transmission systems, The Impact of Outdated CSI, Classical Channel Prediction, Neural Network 
Based Prediction Schemes (5L) 
Flat fading SISO Prediction, Channel-Gain Prediction with Real-Valued and Complex-Valued RNN, Channel 
Envelope Prediction, Frequency-Selective SISO Prediction (5L) 
Performance and Complexity, Computational Complexity (4L) 
Automatic Modulation Classification [10 Lectures]: 
Signal Models for modulation classification (2L) 
Likelihood based classifiers (2L) 
Distribution Test-based classifiers (2L) 
Modulation classification Features (2L) 
Machine Learning models for Modulation classification (2L) 
Channel Encoding and Decoding [18 Lectures]:  
Overview of Channel coding and Deep Learning (3L) 
DNN for Channel coding and to Decoding Directly (5L) 
DNNs for joint equalization and Channel Decoding, CNNs for Decoding (5L) 
Decoding by Eliminating Correlated Channel Noise, BP-CNN Decoding (5L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Zhechen Zhu, Ashoke K. Nandi, Automatic Modulation Classification: Principles, Algorithms     and 

Applications 
2. Luo, F. L., (2020), Machine Learning for Future Wireless Communications, Wiley 
3. He, R., and Ding Z., (2019), Application of Machine Learning in Wireless Communications, The Institution of 

Engineering and Technology 
 
Self Learning Material  
Machine Learning For Communications Emerging Technologies Initiative, IEEE 
https://mlc.committees.comsoc.org/research-library/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Jagannatham, A. K., Principles of Communication II, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering,       Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

82 
 



Title Delay Tolerant Networks Number EEL7XX 
Department Electrical Engineering/ Computer Science and L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Engineering 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Data Communication Networks, Data and   

Computer Communications 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Expose students to theoretical and practical work and knowledge in the field of Delay-Tolerant Networks   
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Study the problems with networking in networks tolerant of huge delay and with problems in the 

connectivity. 
2. Analysis of protocols and possible application used in DTNs (sensor networks, space communications, 

mobile ad-hoc networks) 
 
Contents  
Introduction for Delay-Tolerant Networking (DTN) [3 Lectures] 
Networking in stress and high heterogeneous environments. Asynchronous message sending. Combination of store-and-
forward message switching with physical data transmission/receiving.  [ 5 Lectures] 
Medium access control for delay-tolerant services. Quality of service; streaming control [4 Lectures] 
Modeling of telecommunication traffic; modeling of delays and queues; modeling of delay-tolerant queues. [4 Lectures] 
DTN protocol stack [ 3 Lectures] 
Deterministic and probabilistic routing protocols [5 Lectures] 
DTN Security issues [8 Lectures]: Attacks on DTN (3L), Solution (5L) 
DTN application requirements, Concrete DTN implementations [11 Lectures]: inter-planetary communications (3L), 
submarine communications (2L), sensor networks (3L), mobile ad-hoc networks (3L) 
 
Textbook  
Vasilakos, A. V.,  Zhang, Y., and Spyropoulos, T., (2011), Delay Tolerant Networks: Protocols and Applications, 
CRC Press 
 
Self Learning Material  
Machine Learning For Communications Emerging Technologies Initiative, IEEE 
https://mlc.committees.comsoc.org/research-library/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 

 
 
 
 
  

83 
 



Title Hardware Aware Communications Number EEL7XX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Data and   

Computer Communications, Intelligent Radio 
Networks 

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Concepts related to hardware aware communications 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Perform hardware-algorithm co-design for communications. 
 
Contents  
Application aware communication for IoT devices [6 Lectures] 
Joint Sampling, Communication, and Inference [6 Lectures] 
Intelligent communication for heterogeneous hardware constraints  [6 Lectures] 
Transfer learning for different hardware constraints [6 Lectures] 
Hardware-algorithm co-design [6 Lectures] 
Full-Dulplex Radios: Self-Interference Cancellation [6 Lectures] 
Hardware-aware communication protocols [6 Lectures] 
 
Self Learning Material  
Machine Learning For Communications Emerging Technologies Initiative, IEEE 
https://mlc.committees.comsoc.org/research-library/ 
 
Preparatory Course Material 

  

84 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Nano and Flexible Electronics Specialization 
 

  

85 
 



Title Introduction To Spintronics  Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide fundamental concepts on spintronics 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the operation of spin based devices 
2. Apply the knowledge for the improvement of spin based devices  
 
Contents  
Introduction: The early history of spin, Quantum Mechanics of spin, Bohr Planetary Model and Space 
Quantization, Bloch sphere, Spin-orbit interaction, exchange interaction (5 Lectures)  
Spin relaxation mechanism, spin relaxation in metals and semiconductors, spin Galvanic effect, spin 
dependent transport and tunneling (5 Lectures) 
Spin Phenomena [6 Lectures]:  
Spin Hall Effect, Galvanic Effect (2 Lectures), Spin Capacitor Effect, Spin Hanle Effect, Spin Seebeck Effect, Spin 
Peltier Effect (4 Lectures) 
Spin Transfer Torque [8 Lectures]: 
Introduction, Spin-transfer drive magnetic dynamics (4 Lectures), Current-driven switching of magnetization, 
Domain wall motion and scattering (4 Lectures) 
Semiconductor Spintronics [9 Lectures]: 
Quantum spin-polarized transport, Pure spin currents, Spin-orbit interaction in semiconductors (4 Lectures), 
Spectral problem of the Rashba Hamiltonian, Geometric spin phases, Diluted magnetic semiconductors (5 
Lectures) 
Spintronic Devices [9 Lectures]:  
Spin diode and transistors, Datta-Das spin-FET, Spin-Valve, spin based bio-sensors (4 Lectures) 
Qubits and introduction to quantum computing (5 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks  
S. Bandyopadhyay, M. Cahay, Introduction to Spintronics. CRC Press, 2nd edition, 2015. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. S. Datta, Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic Systems. Cambridge University Press, Revised edition, 1997. 
2. Žutić, I., Fabian, J. & Das Sarma, S. Spintronics: fundamentals and applications. Rev. Mod. Phys. 76, 323–410 

(2004) 
3. David J. Griffiths, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, Pearson Education, 2nd edition, 2015. 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
Prof. A. Perumal, Spintronics: Physics and Technology, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Physics, Indian 
Institute of Technology Guwahati,  
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115103039/ 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

86 
 



Title Flexible and Printed Electronics Number EEL7330 

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. IV, M.Tech., Ph.D Type Elective 
Prerequisite Understanding of Electronic Materials and  Devices   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Explain fundamentals of thin-film electronic materials and devices for flexible electronics. 
2.  Teach the concepts for heterogeneous integration of thin-film devices on flexible platforms. 
3.  Will give an overview of the different printing and coating techniques. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Identify the advantages, drawbacks, performances, complementarity and uniqueness of large area 

manufacturing vs. silicon technology 
2.  Integrate the operation principles, architectures and processing of main devices and systems fabricated for 

flexible electronics 
3.  Predict systems integration issues and propose methods for integration and encapsulation of printed devices 

and systems 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Flexible and Printed Electronics (2 Lectures):  
Evolution of Flexible Electronics, review of cutting edge research on flexible, plastic, stretchable, conformable 
or printed electronics. Materials, components, and systems, applications for IoT  
Materials, Processing, and Manufacturing (12 Lectures):  
Various semiconductors, dielectric, and conducting materials, Organic semiconductors (4 L); From chemical 
bonds to bands, Charge injection and transport, Examples of printable functional materials , Thin-film 
Deposition and Processing Methods for Flexible Devices (4 L), Solution-based Patterning Processes; Ink-jet 
printing, gravure and other processes, surface energy effects, multilayer patterning (4 L) 
Flexible Thin-Film Transistors and Circuits (14 Lectures):  
Thin-Film Transistor; Device structure and performance, Electrical characteristics, parameter extraction, 
characterization methods for rigid and flexible devices, electrical stability, printed transistors (5 L); 
Organic/polymer, metal-oxide, electrolyte gated, Case studies, submicrometer OTFTs and gravure printed 
OTFTs (5 L), From transistors to circuits, circuits on flexible and non- silicon substrates, Contacts and Interfaces 
to Organic and Inorganic Electronic Devices, Schottky contacts, defects, carrier recombination, effect of applied 
mechanical strain (4 L) 
Other Flexible Devices and System Integration (14 Lectures):  
Organic Light Emitting Diodes, flexible OLED displays and lighting, smart wallpaper (5 L), Organic Solar Cells, 
sensors, flexible batteries, supercapacitors, logic, memory, RFID tags (5 L), Latest applications, Encapsulation, 
Roll to roll processes, Integration Issues, and Designs for Future (4 L) 
 
Textbook 
1. Nisato, G.,  Lupo, D., Ganz, S. (Editors) (2016), Organic and Printed Electronics: Fundamentals and Applications, 

1st Edition, CRC Press 
2. Caironi, M., Noh, Y-Y., (Editors) (2015), Large Area and Flexible Electronics, 2nd Edition, WILEY-VCH 
3. Wong, W. S., and Salleo, A., (Editors) (2009) Flexible electronics: Materials and Applications, 1st Edition, Springer 
 
Self Learning Material  
Recent Papers form Flexible and Printed Electronics area, IEEE, IOP, AIP, RSC and others 

 

87 
 



Title Advanced Compact Modeling Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Specialization Core 
Prerequisite Physics and Modeling of the MOS   

Transistors 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide understanding of industry standard compact modeling techniques  
2. Introduce SPICE simulations  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify best compact modeling approach for their problem 
2. Develop own compact models and use them in circuit simulations 
 
Contents  
Introduction to TCAD Simulations, SPICE simulations and Compact Modeling (3 Lectures)  
Resistor and Diode Modeling [7 Lectures]:  
Semiconductor resistors, 2-terminal resistor model, 3-terminal resistor model (4 Lectures) 
JUNCAP2 diode model, charge and capacitance models, diode breakdown model (3 Lectures) 
Compact Modeling Techniques [7 Lectures]:  
Charge based, threshold voltage based and surface potential-based modeling of MOS transistor, table look-
up-based models (4 Lectures) 
Developing analytical solutions, error margin. Accessing in-built compact models inside simulators (3 
Lectures) 
Advanced Multi-Gate Devices [7 Lectures]:  
Introduction to FinFETs, Charge based modeling of FinFETs (4 Lectures) 
Introduction to Gate-All-Around Transistors and modeling (3 Lectures) 
Parameter Extraction and Benchmark Testing: Importance of parameter extraction and extraction procedure. 
Symmetry tests for DC and capacitances, harmonic balance test, slope-ratio tests, gm/Id test. (4 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks  
1. G. Gildenblat, Compact Modeling: Principles, Techniques and Applications. Springer, 2010.  
2. W. Liu, MOSFET Models for SPICE Simulation: Including BSIM3v3 and BSIM4, Wiley, 2001 
 
Self Learning Material  
Research papers on semiconductor device modeling 
 
Preparatory Course Material  
K. Kundert, Designer’s Guide to SPICE and SPECTRE, Springer, 1995 

 
  

88 
 



Title Quantum Nanoelectronics Number  
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [E] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. 4th Year Type Elective Course 
Prerequisite Semiconductor Devices   
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Each the fundamentals of quantum nanoelectronics 
2. Explain the nano structures classifications and transport mechanism in quantum structures 
3. Briefly teach the fabrication and characterization of Nanoelectronic Devices 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Have a deeper understanding of Nanostructures 
2.  Understand the basic concepts of Nanoelectronic devices  
 
Contents   
Introduction and review of electronic technology (5 lectures): 
Electronics to nanoelectronics, particles, waves and Schrodinger Equation, quantum wells, wires and dots, 
quantum description of metals, semiconductors, junction devices                                                                                                                   
Building blocks for nanoelectronic devices (15 lectures):  
Fabrication and characterization methods for nanoelectronics (5 L); FET – size limits and alternative forms, 
devices based on electron tunneling, resonant tunnel diodes (5 L); Single electron transistors, molecular 
electronics, hybrid electronics (5 L) 
Transport of charge in Nanostructures under Electric field (8 lectures):  
Parallel transport, hot electrons, perpendicular transport (4 L), Quantum transport in nanostructures, Coulomb 
blockade (4 L) 
Transport of charge in magnetic field (5 lectures):  
Effect of magnetic field on a crystal. Aharonov-Bohm effect, the Shubnikov-de Hass effect, the quantum Hall 
effect.                                           
Alternate Devices (9 lectures):  
Structure and properties of heterojunction devices (4 L), Heterostructure semiconductor laser, Quantum well 
laser, quantum dot LED, quantum dot laser, Quantum well optical modulator (5 L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Martinez-Duart J. M., Martin Palma R. J., Rueda F. A., (2006), Nanotechnology for Microelectronics and 

optoelectronics, Elsevier 
2. Fahrner W. R., (2005), Nanotechnology and Nanoelectronics, Springer 
 
Preparatory Course Material 
Nanoelectronics: Devices and Materials, Centre for Nanoscience and Engineering, IISc Bangalore, NPTEL 
Course,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117108047/ 

 
  

89 
 



Title Non-Volatile Memory Technologies Number  
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory 

/Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide background knowledge of advanced non-volatile memory technologies.  
2. Teach the students about emerging memory devices and applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Describe the structure and operation of non-volatile devices, and challenges associated with them 
2.  Explain the physics with new structures such RRAM devices 
3.  Understand the operation of new memory technologies and related circuits. 
 
Contents  
Memory Development for CMOS (8 Lectures): 
Historical Progress in Data Storage Devices and Techniques for Computing and CMOS, Scaling of Memory 
and ITRS (4 L), Memory Types and Hierarchy, Static and Dynamic Memory Designs, NAND and NOR Flash 
Memory, Fabrication Techniques (4 L)  
 
Emerging Non-Volatile Memory Technologies (20 Lectures): 
Non-volatile memory technologies and their properties, Magnetoresistive Random Access Memory (MRAM), 
Phase change RAM (PCRAM), Ferroelectric RAM (FeRAM) (5 L), Resistive RAM (RRAM), Applications of 
RRAM, Fabrication and Process Considerations (5L); Memristers, Synapse, RRAM devices and Memristers 
for Neuromorphic Applications (5 L);  Design implications of emerging non-volatile memory (NVM) 
technologies, in-memory computing (5 L) 
 
Textbook  
1. Hu, C. (2010), Modern Semiconductor Devices for Integrated Circuits, Prentice Hall. 
2. Suri, M. (2020), Applications of Emerging Memory Technology, Springer.     
 
Self Learning Material 
Recent Papers on Emerging Memory Technologies 

 
  

90 
 



Title Semiconductor Optoelectronics Number  
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [E] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Elective Course 
Prerequisite Semiconductor Devices   
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Provide students an understanding of operation of semiconductor optoelectronic devices. 
2. Teach students heterojunctions and quantum wells and their application to optoelectronic devices. 
3. Teach students design, analysis, & modelling of semiconductor LEDs and lasers. 
4. Teach students design of various types of photodetectors and optical fibers 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Be familiarized with optoelectronics devices and understand the physical principle behind this. 
2. Design single-mode junction lasers at different wavelengths to meets specs. 
3. Design junction & avalanche photodiodes to meet specs  
4. Incorporate heterostructures and quantum wells to improve device performance devices.  
 
Contents   
Compound Semiconductors [6 Lectures]:  
Semiconductor optoelectronic materials, Structures (2L) 
Fermi level and quasi Fermi levels, band gap modification(4L) 
Semiconductor Photon Sources [4 Lectures]: Interaction of photons with electrons and holes in a semiconductor, 
Rates of emission and absorption, Luminescence 
Quantum structures in semiconductors [4 Lectures]: Quantum wells, quantum dots, quantum wires. 
Light Emitting diodes [5 Lectures]: materials, structure and device characteristics 
Semiconductor Laser[9 Lectures]:  
Dasic structure, theory and device characteristics, DFB, DBR (5L) 
Quantum well and VCSE Lasers, Laser diode arrays(4L) 
Semiconductor Photodetectors [6 Lectures]: Types of photodetectors: photoconductors and photodiodes, PIN 
diodes and Avalanche photodetectors and their characteristics 
Solar cells [4 Lectures]: Basic principle, current voltage characteristics, Spectral response, Heterojunction and 
cascaded solar cells. 
Optics [4 Lectures]: Integrated optics, Optical fibers and their characteristics, Fiber optic communication systems 
                                                                                                         
Textbooks  
1. Sze S. M., (2001), Physics of Semiconductor Devices, John Wiley & Sons. 
2. Streetman B. G., Banerjee S. K., (2007), Solid State Electronic Devices, Pearson Education Asia. 
3. Bhattacharya P., (1993), Semiconductor Optoelectronics devices, Pearson Education 
 
 

 
  

91 
 



Title Organic Optoelectronics Number  
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory /Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide fundamental understanding of the optical and electronic properties of organic materials and 

devices 
2. Teach the students the basics of the emerging technological area of printed flexible optoelectronics 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Demonstrate understanding of the various key classes of organic optoelectronics, their basic device 

structures as well as identify their fundamental advantages and disadvantages 
2. Propose an appropriate characterization technique in order to characterize a specific property relating to 

the material and the targeted application  
3. Apply the knowledge of an enabling technology meeting the needs of society, in the field of organic 

electronics and nanotechnology 
 
Contents  
 
Organic Molecules and Molecular Solids (5 Lectures): Electronic structure of atoms, Atomic and Molecular 
Orbitals, LCAO, Bonding and antibondig orbitals, Covalent Bond, Sigma and Pi Bonds, Energy Levels, 
Spectroscopic properties, Aggregates, Van der Waals Bonding, Hydrogen Bonding 
Photophysics and Conduction (9 Lectures):  
Excited states: Absorption and emission, Singlet and triplet states, Radiative and non-radiative transitions, 
Dimer, Eximers; Excitons: Wannier Exciton, Charge-transfer Exciton Frenkel Exciton, Exciton Diffusion, 
Excitonic Energy Transfer (5 L); Conduction in Organic Solids: Conductivity: carrier concentration versus 
mobility, Carrier generation, Hopping transport, Mobility measurements, Traps. (4 L) 
Flat panel display technologies and Lasers (12 Lectures):  
Physics of liquid-crystal displays; organic light-emitting diodes: materials, devices and applications (4 L); 
fundamentals of radiometry, Organic Light Emitting Transistors (4 L), Lasing Action in Organic 
Semiconductors: Lasing Process, Optically Pumped Organic Lasers, Electrical Pumping of Organic Lasers (4 
L).  
Photovoltaics and Photodetectors (8 Lectures):  
Photovoltaic Devices, Organic Heterojunction Photovoltaic Cells, Organic/Nanorod hybrid Photovoltaics (4 
L), Gratzel Cells (Dye sensitized solar cells), Photodetector Devices (4 L) 
Essential Fabrication Technology (8 Lectures): Film Formation Techniques: Spin coating,  Langmuir-Blodget, 
Evaporation, Chemical Vapor Phase Deposition (4 L), Printing and coating techniques, Ink-Jet Printing, Self-
Assembly, Introduction to modern xerography (4 L) 
 
Textbook  
Hu, W., (Editor), (2013), Organic Optoelectronics, 1st Edition, Wiley-VCH 
 
Self Learning Material 
Recent Papers on topics such as OLEDs, OLETs and OPVs 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

92 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Smart Grid Specialization 
 

  

93 
 



 
Title Introduction to Smart Grid Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech/Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Power Engineering (for B.Tech. students)   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide concepts and topics that are relevant to smart grid technologies to facilitate exploring research 
opportunities 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Understand the basic concepts of smart grid development and the critical technologies that underpin such 
development, their basic principles, physical constraints, and technological potentials 
 
Contents  
 
Smart Grid Basics: Evolution of Electric Power Grid and Smart Grid, Objectives, main features and challenges 
of smart grid (5 lectures) 
Energy Resources: Centralized vs. distributed generation (1 lecture); renewable energy: solar, wind, 
hydropower, biomass, geothermal, ocean wave; benefit, costs, and policies of renewable energy (5 lectures); 
renewable sources integration – overcoming intermittence; storage systems technology (4 lectures) 
Plug-in Electric Vehicle (PEV): History of EV; PEV challenges and potential solutions (1 lecture); EV and electric 
power grid; PEV charging infrastructure, challenges and solutions (4 lectures); PEV as an energy storage 
device and an energy source (V2G) (2 lectures) 
Demand-side management: Load profile of the power grid; market pricing (3 lectures); peak shaving and valley 
filling; load forecasting (4 lectures); regulations and policies (3 lectures) 
Monitoring and Protection: Wide-area monitoring system (WAMS), SCADA and PMU (4 lectures); advanced 
metering infrastructure (AMI); smart metering (3 lectures); communication infrastructure and technologies 
(3 lectures) 
 
 
Textbook  
1. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power Systems, Willey-IEEE 
India Press 
2. Ehsani,M., Gao,Y., Gay,S.E., Emadi,A., (2005), Modern Electric, Hybrid Electric, and Fuel Cell Vehicles: 
Fundamentals, Theory, and Design, CRC Press 
3.  Bansal,R., (2019), Power System Protection in Smart Grid Environment, CRC Press 
 
Self Learning Material 
The Smart Grid: An Introduction, 
http://www.oe.energy.gov/SmartGridIntroduction.htm, Department of Energy, 2008. 
 

 
 
  

94 
 



Title Renewable Energy Systems Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide exposure to operation of various non-conventional energy sources, their characteristics, and their 
interface with grid 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Design and develop standalone and grid connected renewable energy systems 
 
Contents  
Solar PV: Solar PV characteristics, cell, module, array, series parallel combination, partial shading, MPPT (3 
lectures), grid synchronization using various converter topologies (3 lectures) 
Solar Thermal: Principle of operation, thermal efficiency, concentrators-architecture, applications (4 lectures) 
Wind Energy Systems: Principle of operation, types of wind turbines, Cp-λ characteristics, Betz limit, MPPT, 
onshore and offshore wind farms (4 lectures), types of wind generators-operation and control of various types 
of generators (6 lectures) 
Hydro Power Generation: Hydro systems, hydro resources, types of hydro turbine, small, mini and micro hydro 
systems, pumped storage (6 lectures) 
Fuel Cells: Types, principle of operation, V-I characteristics, applications (4 lectures) 
Other Renewable Energy Sources: Introduction to geothermal, ocean, biomass energy generation (6 lectures) 
Energy Storage Systems: Introduction to various mechanical, chemical, electro-chemical, and electrical storage 
systems and their applications (6 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power Systems, Willey-IEEE India 

Press 
2. Masters,G.M., (2004), Renewable and Efficient Electric Power Systems, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
3. Bhadra,S.N., Kastha,D., Banerjee, S., (2005), Wind Electrical Systems, Oxford Univ. Press 

 
 
  

95 
 



Title Power Quality Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech/Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Introduction to Electrical Engineering    
Objectives 
The Instructor will provide knowledge of: 
1. Various Power quality issues and their origin 
2. Impact of various power quality problems on appliances  
3. Various compensators/filters used for mitigating different PQ issues 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have ability to: 
1. Identify the sources of various power quality problems. 
2. Estimate the impact of various power quality problems on appliances. 
3. Decide the compensators and filters to keep the power quality indices within the standards 
 
Contents  
Overview and definition of power quality (PQ): Sources of pollution and regulations (2 lectures), power quality 
problems, rapid voltage fluctuations voltage unbalance, voltage dips and voltage swells, short duration 
outages (4 lectures) 
Definitions Voltage sag analysis and mitigation: Sag caused by motor starting, sag caused by utility fault clearing, 
sag mitigation, sag magnitude and duration calculations, RMS voltage, calculation in 1-phase systems (6 
lectures) 
Harmonics: Effects-within the power system, interference with communication harmonic measurements, 
harmonic elimination (4 lectures) 
Harmonic distortion: Overview of power system harmonics, harmonic analysis, harmonic sources-the static 
converters, transformer magnetization and non-linearities, rotating machines, arc furnaces, fluorescent 
lighting (5 lectures), total harmonic distortion, rms and average value calculations, effects of harmonic 
distortion (3 lectures) 
Monitoring power quality: Monitoring essentials, power quality measuring equipment, current industry trends 
(4 lectures) 

Textbook  
1. Kennedy,B.W., (2000), Power Quality Primer, McGrawHill. 
2. Dugan,R.C., Mcgranaghan,M.F., Santoso,S., Beaty,H.W., (2002), Electrical Power System Quality, 

McGrawHill. 
3. Bollen,M.H.J., (2007), Understanding Power Quality Problems: Voltage Sag and Interruptions, IEEE Press. 

 
  

96 
 



 
Title Power System Protection Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Power System Analysis and Stability   
Objectives 
The Instructor will provide knowledge of: 
1.  Various protection schemes and their applications in power industry 
2.  Relay coordination, instrument transformers 
3.  Numerical protection schemes based on signal processing techniques 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design/propose protection schemes for various power system components based on digital signal 

processing 
2. Design relay coordination systems in distribution and transmission 
 
Contents  
Overview of Power System Protection: Architecture of protection system, evolution of relays, zones of protections, 
concept of primary and back-up protection (2 lectures) 
Overcurrent Protection: Principles of fuse and overcurrent protection and application to feeder and motor 
protection, relay coordination in distribution system (6 lectures) 
Distance Protection: Principles of distance relaying (2 lectures) and application to transmission system 
protection, relay coordination (5 lectures) 
Differential Protection: Principles of differential protection (2 lectures) and application to transformer, bus bar 
and generator armature winding protection (5 lectures) 
Introduction to Digital Relaying: Sampling, concept of moving window, signal conditioning, signal processing (4 
lectures) 
Instrument Transformer: Current and voltage transformers in power system protection (6 lectures) 
Circuit breakers: Arc initiation and quenching, oil circuit breakers, air blast circuit breakers vacuum circuit 
breakers, SF6 circuit breakers (5 lectures), current chopping, reverse recovery voltage (3 lectures) 
Lightning arresters: Principle of operation and types (2 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Singh, L.P., (2017), Digital Protection: Protective Relaying from Electromechanical to Microprocessor, 2nd Edition, 

New Age International Publications 
2. Ram,B., Vishwakarma,D.N., (2017), Power System Protection and Switchgear, 2nd Edition, Tata McGraw Hill 

Publications. 
3. Phadke,A.G., Thorp,J.S., (2009), Computer relaying for Power System, 2nd Edition, John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 

Publications 
 
Self Learning Material 
Soman,S.A.,  Power System Protection, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Bombay, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/101/108101039/   

 
  

97 
 



 
Title Power System Dynamics and Control Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech/Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Power System Analysis and Stability (for B.Tech   

student) 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide exposure to dynamic behaviour of synchronous machines under small and large disturbances and 
the concept of voltage stability in a power system 
2.  Provide exposure to the mathematical methods of improving system stability 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design and implement techniques to control a power system 
2.  Design control techniques/stabilizers to improve the system stability 
 
Contents  
Introduction to stability problem: Rotor angle stability, voltage stability, mid-term and long-term stability, small 
signal stability, transient stability, oscillatory and non-oscillatory instability (2 lectures) 
Modeling of synchronous machine: synchronous machine parameters, dq-axis modeling, voltage equations, per-
unit modeling, equivalent circuit, dq-axis time constants, swing equations (4 lectures), synchronous machine 
representation in stability students, capability curve of an alternator (3 lectures) 
Excitation systems: Elements, types, dynamic performance measures, control and protective functions (5 
lectures), modeling of excitation systems (2 lectures) 
Governor modeling and automatic generation control: Turbine, governor modeling, isochronous governor, speed-
droop characteristics, automatic generation control (3 lectures) 
Small signal stability analysis: Eigen properties, participation and sensitivity analysis (3 lectures), SMIB system, 
synchronizing and damping torque, K1-K6 model (5 lectures), PSS design and types (2 lectures) 
Transient stability analysis: Equal area criteria, direct method of transient stability analysis (5 lectures) 
Voltage stability issues: PV characteristics, voltage collapse phenomenon, prevention of voltage collapse (5 
lectures) 
Sub synchronous oscillations: Torsional oscillations in multi-mass turbine, interactions with nearby dc systems 
(3 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Kundur,P., (1994), Power System Stability and Control, McGraw Hill 
2. Machowski,J., Bialek,J., Bumby,J.R., (2008), Power Systems Dynamics, Stability and Control, 2nd Edition, John 

Wiley. 
 
Self Learning Material 
Kothari,M.L.,  Power System Dynamics, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/102/108102080/   

 
  

98 
 



Title HVDC and FACTS Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Power System Analysis and Stability, Power Electronics   

(for B.Tech students) 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Present the need and operational aspects of HVDC transmission systems along with their associated 
    converters and their control 
2. Provide concepts of series and shunt compensation to enhance the performance of transmission lines and 

stability of Power System using FACTS devices  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop converters and their control methods in HVDC transmission systems 
2. Develop converter topologies and their control methods for FACTS devices 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Introduction of DC power transmission technology, comparison of AC and DC transmission, 
advantages, limitations and types of HVDC transmission systems (3 lectures) 
LCC HVDC systems: Ignition angle, commutation overlap, relation between AC and DC quantities (4 lectures) 
Control of HVDC systems: CIA, CC, CEA characteristics, current limits (3 lectures) 
Harmonics and filters: AC and DC side harmonics (3 lectures) 
Interaction with AC system: Effective Short Circuit Ratio, dynamic overvoltage, voltage stability, harmonic 
resonance (2 lectures) 
Introduction to VSC HVDC systems: Introduction to VSC HVDC systems, voltage analysis, active and reactive 
power flow, control of VSC HVDC systems (3 lectures) 
FACTS devices: Objectives of compensation, types of compensation (2 lectures) 
Shunt compensators: TCR, TSR, TSC, SVC and STATCOM - principle of operation, modeling, and control (6 
lectures) 
Series compensation: SSSC, TSSC, TCSC, and TCSR - principle of operation, modeling, and control (6 lectures) 
Voltage and phase angle regulators: Thyristor controlled voltage and phase angle regulators - principle of 
operation, modeling, and control (4 lectures) 
Power flow controllers – UPFC and IPFC - principle of operation, modeling, and control (6 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Padiyar,K.R., (2017), HVDC Power Transmission Systems, 3rd Edition, New Age Publishers 
2. Hingorani,L.G., Gyugyi,L., (2000), Understanding FACTS: Concepts and Technology of Flexible AC Transmission 

Systems, IEEE Press 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Singh,S.N.,  High Voltage DC Transmission, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, 

Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104013/ 

2.  Bhattacharya,A.,  Facts Devices, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineering, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/107/108107114/ 

 
 
  

99 
 



 
Title Power System Restructuring Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Power Engineering (for BTech students)   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide understanding of economics of a restructured power system 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Model markets, calculate and analyze price associated with power generation and transmission in a 
restructured power system 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Reasons and objectives for restructuring of power industry - Indian and global scenario, 
restructuring process, entities involved, market place mechanisms (4 lectures) 
Fundamentals of Economics: Introduction, consumer and suppliers behavior, market equilibrium, costs of 
production, competitive market (5 lectures) 
Market Models: Introduction, models based on contractual agreement, comparisons of market models, 
electricity vs. other commodities (4 lectures) 
Transmission Congestion Management: Introduction, classification of congestion management methods, ATC, 
non-market methods, nodal pricing, inter-zonal intra-zonal congestion management, capacity alleviation 
method (6 lectures) 
Locational Marginal Prices: Fundamentals, LMP formulation implementation, LMP using AC and DC OPF (4 
lectures) 
Ancillary Service Management: Type, services related to load-generation balancing, voltage and reactive power, 
black start capability service, co-optimization of energy and reserve services (4 lectures) 
Pricing of transmission network usage and loss allocation: Principles and methods of transmission pricing, 
classification of transmission pricing methods, database issues in transmission pricing, loss allocation methods, 
comparison (5 lectures) 
Market power and generators bidding: Attributes of a perfectly competitive market, the firm’s supply decision 
under perfect competition, imperfect competition, market power, financial markets, introduction to optimal 
bidding by a generator company, optimal bidding methods (6 lectures) 
Global and Indian energy market evolution: Global markets - ERCOT, PJM, Nordic power markets, need of 
standard market design, Indian market framework, reform initiatives, ABT, electricity acts (4 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Kirschen,D., Strbac,G., (2004), Fundamentals of Power System economics, John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
2. Hunt,S., (2002), Making competition work in electricity, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
3. Lai,L.L., (2001), Power System Restructuring and Deregulation: Trading, Performance and Information Technology, 

John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Abhyankar,A.R., Khaparde,S.A.,  Restructured Power Systems, NPTEL Course Material, 
     https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/101/108101005/ 
     

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

100 
 



Title Power Quality Mitigation Techniques Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Power Electronics, Power Quality (for B.Tech   

students), Power Quality (for M.Tech. students) 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide an understanding of various techniques and components used to improve the power quality in 
distribution networks 
  
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Design topologies and control methods to mitigate power quality disturbances using active and passive filters 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Representation of harmonics, waveform, active, reactive and harmonic power, THD, distortion 
power, power factor (4 lectures) 
Power components in three-phase circuits: 𝛼𝛽0coordinates, instantaneous active and reactive power in three-phase 
balanced circuits, three-phase unbalanced circuit analysis using symmetrical components, power calculation 
in unbalanced and non-sinusoidal three phase systems (6 lectures) 
Fundamentals of load compensation: Power factor improvement, voltage regulation (3 lectures), phase balancing 
using symmetrical components (5 lectures) 
Theory of shunt compensation: State space modeling of compensator, switching control (3 lectures), reactive 
power theory, theory of instantaneous symmetrical components (5 lectures) 
Theory of series compensation: Principle of operation and control of dynamic voltage restorer (6 lectures) 
Unified power quality conditioner: Principle of operation of UPQC (4 lectures) 
Harmonics suppression with passive filters: Types of filters and their design (6 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Ghosh,A., Ledwich,G., (2002), Power Quality Enhancement Using Custom Power Devices, Springer 

Science+Business Media 
2. Sankaran,C., (2002), Power Quality, CRC Press 
3. Akagi,H., Watanabe,E.H., Aredes,M., (2017), Instantaneous Power Theory and Applications to Power 

Conditioning, Wiley-IEEE Press 

Self Learning Material 
1. Kumar,M.,  Power Quality in Power Distribution Systems, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 

Engineering, IIT Madras, 
     https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/106/108106025/ 
2. Bhattacharya,A.,  Power Quality Improvement Technique, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical and 

Electronics Engineering, IIT Roorkee, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/107/108107157/ 

     
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

101 
 



Title Plugin Electric Vehicles Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Power Electronics, Introduction to Smart Grid   

(for B.Tech students), Introduction to Smart Grid 
(for M.Tech students) 

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide understanding of various technologies of plugin electric vehicle and hybrid electric vehicle and their 
role in smart grid operation 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design powertrain circuit topology and appropriate control scheme for electric vehicle 
2.  Understand and design EV charging infrastructure 
 
Contents  
Introduction to EV: Recent development trends, types of electric vehicles (2 lectures) 
Powertrain: Concepts of powertrain sizing in EV and PHEV, starting, braking (6 lectures) 
Storage systems: Battery types, parameters, battery modeling, battery management (5 lectures) 
Charging Infrastructure: Domestic charging infrastructure, public charging infrastructure, normal charging 
station, occasional charging station, fast charging station, battery swapping station (5 lectures), types of 
charging: constant voltage, constant current, pulse charging, inductive, conductive charging (3 lectures) 
Vehicle-to-X systems: Vehicle-to-grid, vehicle-to-home (5 lectures), vehicle-to-building, vehicle-to-vehicle (3 
lectures) 
Hybrid Electric Vehicle: Configuration of HEV (series, parallel, series-parallel & complex), power flow control in 
HEV configurations, control (6 lectures) 
Vehicle Communication: Introduction to in-vehicle communications and controller area network (4 lectures) 
PEV integration: Impact on transmission and distribution network (3 lectures) 
 
Laboratory: Experiments related to the following topics will be conducted under laboratory component: 
SoC estimation, control of electric vehicle drives, regenerative braking, powertrain and vehicle dynamics, EV 
chargers and their control, vehicle-to-grid technology, vehicle-to-vehicle technology, EV charging from solar 
PV, performance of aggregator, Use of simulation tools (MATLAB, SIEMENS EV related softwares) to simulate 
different subsystems of EV and different scenarios. 
 
Textbook  
1. Husain,I., (2011), Electric and Hybrid Vehicles Design Fundamentals, 2nd Edition, CRC Press 
2. Ehsani,M., Gao,Y., Emadi,A., (2011), Modern Electric, Hybrid Electric, and Fuel Cell Vehicles Fundamentals, 

Theory and Design, 2nd Edition, CRC Press 
3. Larminie,J., Lowry,J., (2003), Electric Vehicle Technology Explained, Wiley 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Jain,A.K.,  Electric Vehicles - Part 1, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Delhi, 
     https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/102/108102121/ 
2. Kumar,P., Majhi,S., Introduction to Hybrid and Electric Vehicles, NPTEL Course Material, Department of 

Electronics and Communication Engineering, IIT Guwahati, 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/103/108103009/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

102 
 



Title Power System Reliability and Security Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Power System Operation and Control (for B.Tech   

students) 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide in depth understanding of reliability and security aspects of generation, transmission, and distribution 
systems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Develop methods to enhance the reliability of supply and security of power system components 
 
Contents  
Introduction:Concept of power system reliability and security. methods of assessment, cost, probabilistic 
reliability criteria (4 lectures) 
Generating capacity reliability:Probability methods- generation model, loss of load indices, loss of energy indices 
(6 lectures), frequency and duration method- generation model, system risk indices (4 lectures) 
Interconnected systems:Evaluation techniques for multi-interconnected systems, factors affecting emergency 
assistance, frequency and duration method (6 lectures) 
Operating reserve:Various methods of estimation, security function approach, response risk (4 lectures) 
Composite generation and transmission systems:Network configurations, state selection, system and load point 
indices, data requirements (5 lectures) 
Distribution system reliability: Networks configurations, evaluation techniques (5 lectures), indices and factors 
affecting reliability (3 lectures) 
Power system security:Security analysis, security assessment, contingency analysis, algorithms to determine 
system security, security assessment based on performance index (5 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Billinton,R., Allan,R.N., (1986), Reliability Evaluation of Power Systems, 2nd Edition, Springer US 
2. Billinton,R., Ringlee,R.J., Wood,A.J., (1973), Power-System Reliability Calculations, MIT Press 
3. Singh,C., Jirutitijaroen,P., Mitra,J., (2018), Electric Power Grid Reliability Evaluation: Models and Methods, Wiley-

IEEE Press 
 

 
  

103 
 



Title Selected Topics in Distributed Generation Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech./M.Tech./Ph.D. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Power Electronics, Renewable Energy Systems (for   

B.Tech students) 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1.  Provide salient concepts of DG operation and control in both grid connected and autonomous modes 
2.  Provide exposure to the challenges related to stability, grid integration, and ancillary services in distributed 

generation 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Develop control schemes for distributed generators to operate in grid connected and autonomous mode 
2. Understand various challenges and propose solutions related to stability, grid integration and ancillary 

services in distributed generation 
 
Contents  
Distributed generation: Introduction, DG types, concept of inertia and frequency response, flexibility issues, 
ramping issues (3 lectures) 
Control of distributed generation: Typical distributed energy sources (1 lecture), their modelling (5 lectures) and 
control(4 lectures) 
Microgrids: Concept of microgrid, microgrid benefits, typical structures and configurations of various 
microgrids (3 lectures), control of converters in DC and AC microgrids (4 lectures), active and reactive power 
control, voltage and frequency control of inverter-based sources (3 lectures), virtual synchronous generators (2 
lectures) 
Stability: Stability issues with weak grid integration and in microgrid operation (4 lectures) 
Other challenges in grid integration: Power quality requirements, DG support under abnormal grid conditions (3 
lectures), issues related to islanding and reverse power flow, network congestion (5 lectures), and protection 
(2 lectures) 
Ancillary services: Ancillary services with DGs, control for ancillary services, virtual power plants (3 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. Bollean,M.H.J., Hasan,F., (2011), Integration of Distributed Generation in the Power Systems, Willey-IEEE India 

Press 
2. Masters,G.M., (2004), Renewable and Efficient Electric Power Systems, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
3. Bevrani,H., Francois,B., Ise,T., (2017), Microgrid Dynamics and Control, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 

 
 
  

104 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

VLSI Systems 
 
 
 

  

105 
 



Course Title Hardware Design for Artificial Intelligence Number EEL7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Core 
Pre-requisite Artificial Intelligence, Digital and Analog   

Design. 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to learn the concepts of Hardware Design for Artificial Intelligence. 
2. Provide exposure to the students about architectures and hardware co-design for AI. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply fundamental principles of ANN and DNN to hardware architectures. 
2. Implement the basic designs for computing hardware for AI. 
 
Contents: 
Hardware Design for Artificial-Intelligence: Basics of Artificial Intelligence, Moore’s law in context of AI, Need 
of fast computational resources, Hardware for training, Architectural Challenges for Training, Memory 
Challenges, Floating point accuracy. (4 Lectures) 
Modern AI Hardware: CPUs, GPUs, FPGAs, Specialized accelerators, CPU vs. GPU: Speed, Power and 
Bandwidth. (5 Lectures) 
AI Accelerators and Processors: DNN Accelerators and Architectures, Data reuse, Low-cost spatial architectures, 
Energy efficient dataflow, Datapath Taxonomy, Synchronization for parallel processing.(5 Lectures) 
Computing in AI Hardware: Highly-Parallel Compute Paradigms, High-performance matrix multipliers: Systolic 
arrays; Reinforcement Learning for Hardware Design.(5 Lectures) 
Performance Parameters: Implementation of Deep Learning Kernels; Evaluating Performance, Energy efficiency, 
Parallelism, Locality,Memory hierarchy, Roofline model: Multicore Architectures. (5 Lectures) 
Hardware Optimization for AI: Bitwidth optimization, Nonlinear Quantization, Binary Nets, Log-Domain 
Computation. (5 Lectures) 
Compact Network Architectures: Key Metrics for Embedded DNN, Sparse-Matrix Vector DSP, Compact 
Network Architectures (5 Lectures) 
Industry Standards and State-of-the Art: Study of state-of-the art accelerators such as Eyeriss(MIT), Intel Xeon, 
Intel Neural Compute Stick.(5 Lectures) 
Other accelerators from Microsoft and IBM.(3 Lectures) 
 
Text References 
Sze,V. et al., "Efficient Processing of Deep Neural Networks: A Tutorial and Survey," Proceedings of the IEEE, 
vol. 105, no. 12, pp. 2295-2329, Dec. 2017. 
 
Preparatory course material 
1.  Chen,Y.-H. et al., "Eyeriss: An Energy-Efficient Reconfigurable Accelerator for Deep 
     Convolutional Neural Networks, "IEEE International Conference on Solid-State Circuits           
     (ISSCC), pp. 262-264, February 2016. 
2.  https://www.eecs.mit.edu/academics-admissions/subject-updates-fall-2017/6s0826888 
3.  https://cs217.stanford.edu/ 
4.  https://towardsdatascience.com/neural-network-architectures-156e5bad51ba 

 
Additional Reading 
Zhang,Q.J., Gupta,K.C., Neural Networks for RF and Microwave Design. Artech House Publishers, Boston, MA, 
USA, 2000. 

  

106 
 



Course Title VLSI Testing Number EEL7XX0 
 

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite High-level Synthesis, VLSI Design   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to learn the concepts of testing and verification techniques used for VLSI integrated circuits. 
2. Provide exposure to the students about complexity of VLSI testing in high-density VLSI chips in present 

scenario. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply principles of VLSI testing and verification for digital designs. 
2. Implement the test patterns and circuitry for reasonably advanced logic circuits. 

 
Contents 
Basics of VLSI Testing: Introduction to Digital VLSI Design flow; VLSI Testing needs and challenges; Review 
of High-Level Synthesis, Scheduling, Allocation and Binding; Basics of VLSI testing, Flow of testing and 
verification; VLSI Testing Process, Equipment and Economics. (6 Lectures) 
Fault Modeling: Faults and fault models, fault detection and redundancy, Yield and Fault Equivalence, Fault 
location, Fault dominance, Fault Simulation. (6 Lectures) 
Automatic test pattern generation: Automatic test pattern generation (ATPG), Combinational ATPG, Sequential 
ATPG. (4 Lectures) 
Design-for-testability: Design-for-testability (DFT), Testability Measures, Scan design, Test interface and 
boundary scan, JTAG, Delay fault testing. (5 Lectures)  
BIST: Built in Self Test (BIST) for testing of logic and memories, Test automation. (3 Lectures) 
New trends in Testing, Testing challenges for SoCs. (4 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. M. Bushnell and V. D. Agrawal, Essentials of Electronic Testing for Digital, Memory and Mixed Signal VLSI 

Circuits. Springer, 2005. 
2. T. Kropf, Introduction to Formal Hardware Verification. Springer Verlag, 2000.  
3. N. H. E. Weste, D. Harris and A. Banerjee, CMOS VLSI Design: A Circuits and Systems Perspective. Pearson, 

3rd edition, 2006. 
 
Preparatory course material 
1. M. Abramovici, M. Breuer and A. Friedman, Digital System Testing and Testable Design. IEEE Press, 1994. 
2. NPTEL Course: VLSI Design Verification and Test. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106103016/  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

107 
 



 
Course Title Formal Verification Number EEL7XX0 

 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite High-level Synthesis, VLSI Design   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to learn the concepts of verification techniques used for VLSI integrated circuits. 
2. Provide exposure to the students about complexity of verification in the high-density VLSI chips in present 

scenario. 
 

Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply principles of formal verification for digital designs in VLSI systems. 
2. Implement the programs for reasonably advanced logic circuits. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Introduction to Digital VLSI Design flow; Needs and challenges of VLSI systems; Review of 
High-Level Synthesis; Basics of VLSI testing and verification, Flow of testing and verification. (4 Lectures) 
Verification: Introduction- Functional verification, Timing verification, Formal verification. (4 Lectures)  
Basics of equivalence checking and model checking, Hardware emulation. (2 Lectures) 
Various Techniques of Verification: Design verification using simulation, analytical and formal techniques. (3 
Lectures)  
Formal equivalence checking, Finite automata and temporal logic, Symbolic trajectory evaluation, term 
rewriting, Verifying clock domain crossings.  (5 Lectures) 
Testbenches: Analog/mixed-signal verification, Assertion Based Verification. (3 Lectures)  
System Verilog assertions, Verification testbenches, Use of verification algorithms. (4 Lectures) 
SoC and CPU verification challenges, New directions in verification. (3 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. M. Bushnell and V. D. Agrawal, Essentials of Electronic Testing for Digital, Memory and Mixed Signal VLSI 

Circuits. Springer, 2005. 
2. T. Kropf, Introduction to Formal Hardware Verification. Springer Verlag, 2000.  
3. N. H. E. Weste, D. Harris and A. Banerjee, CMOS VLSI Design: A Circuits and Systems Perspective. Pearson, 

3rd edition, 2006. 
 
Preparatory course material 
1. Li.L.; Thornton,M., Digital System Verification: A Combined Formal Methods and Simulation Framework. Morgan 

& Claypool, 2010. 
2. McFarland,M.,C., “Formal Verification of Sequential Hardware: A Tutorial”, IEEE Tran. on Computer-Aided 

Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 12, no. 5 , May 1993. 
3. NPTEL Course: VLSI Design Verification and Test. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106103016/ 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

108 
 



Course Title Advanced VLSI Design and Lab Number EEL7XX0 
 

Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, M. Tech., Ph.D. Type Compulsory 
Pre-requisite Basic VLSI Design   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Enable students to learn the concepts of more advanced topics in VLSI Design to have an  overview of VLSI 

subsystems. 
2. Provide exposure to the students about system level issues and trade-offs in chip designs. 

 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design digital circuits for high-speed, low-power applications. 
2. Implement VLSI subsystem designs using memory and arithmetic units. 
 
Contents: 
Introduction: Economics of VLSI systems, Review of CMOS logic circuits; impact of fabrication issues on design, 
ASIC design flow: logic synthesis, placement and routing. (4 Lectures) 
High-speed Logic Circuits: High-speed switching circuits; Advanced clocking strategies and clock distribution; 
Logical effort, high-speed digital logic design using logical effort, performance optimization between speed 
and power. (6 Lectures) 
Low-Power Design Technique: Deep submicron design issues; Leakage components, estimation and leakage 
tolerant design techniques, Subthreshold, Gate, Junction tunneling, GIDL, Diode leakage etc.; Scalability of 
leakage tolerant design techniques; Low-voltage designs including digital subthreshold operations, trade-off 
between high-speed and low-power designs. (6 Lectures) 
Arithmetic and Memory Architectures: Arithmetic building blocks for ALU; Adders, Multipliers, Shifter, Barrel 
Shifter; Introduction to Memories; High performance memory and array structures. (6 Lectures)  
Interconnect-aware Designs: Impact of scaling and interconnects, signal integrity, buffer insertion and inductive 
peaking, Low swing and Current mode signaling, Capacitively coupled interconnects. (6 Lectures) 
 
Lab experiments: It will include designing and optimization of high-speed circuits using logical effort, Low-
power circuits in subthreshold conduction, Memory architectures such as 6T SRAM cell, etc., fast adders and 
multipliers, interconnect aware designs.  
 
Text Books 
1. K. Roy and S. Prasad, Low Voltage, Low Power VLSI Subsystems.McGraw Hill Education, 1st edition, 2017. 
2. I. Sutherland, R. F. Sproull and D. Harris, Logical Effort: Designing Fast CMOS Circuits. Morgan Kaufmann, 

1st edition, 1999. 
3. J. Rabaey, A. Chandrakasan and B. Nikolic, Digital Integrated Circuits: A Design Perspective, Prentice Hall, 

2nd edition, 2009. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Chandorkar,A.N. et al., Advanced VLSI Design, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Electrical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay,      
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117101004/ 
 
Preparatory course material 
Y. Taur and T. Ning, Fundamentals of Modern VLSI Devices. Cambridge University Press, 2nd edition, 2016. 

 
 
 
 

109 
 



Title VLSI Broadband Communication Circuits Number EEL7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech., M.Tech. , Ph.D.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Analog circuits, Basics of transmission lines,   

fundamentals of continuous time and discrete time 
signals and systems 

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the basic understanding of signal degradation linked to broadband circuits. 
2. Develop the ability to design and implement the integrated circuits for broadband communication. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Design broadband amplifiers, equalizers, data recovery circuits. 
 
Contents  
Digital signal transmission: Introduction to broadband digital communication, Channel characteristics-
intersymbol interference, eye diagrams [3 lectures] 
Digital communication over wired links, Mesochronous and Plesiochronous links [3 lectures] 
 
Synchronization: Phase detectors for periodic signals and random data: Type I PLL [4 lectures] 
Type II PLL [3 lectures] 
 
Clock and data recovery circuits: Analog and digital implementations of CDRs [4 lectures], 
Design implementation of PLL [3 lectures] 
 
SerDes: Drivers and receivers for low frequencies [3lectures] 
Serializer and Deserializer architectures and circuits [5 Lectures]  
 
Equalization: Need of Linear and non-linear equalizers; LMS adaptation [2 lectures] 
Equalizer design and related issues including noise and crosstalk [5 lectures] 
 
Design challenges: Integrated circuit implementation issues of broadband amplifiers for transmission and 
reception [4 lectures] 
Feedforward and decision feedback equalization [3 lectures] 
 
Textbooks 
1. Y. Tsividis, (2012),Mixed Analog Digital VLSI Devices and Technology (An introduction), World   Scientific, 

New Jersey 
2. K. R. Laker and W.M.C. Sansen, (1994), Design of Analog Integrated Circuits and Systems, McGraw-Hill 
3. BehzadRazavi, (1996), Monolithic Phase Locked Loops and Clock Recovery Circuits-Theory and Design, John 

Wiley & Sons,  
 
Preparatory course material 
1. BehzadRazavi, (2015), Design of Integrated Circuits for Optical Communications,John Wiley & Sons. 
2. David Johns and Ken Martin, (2013), Analog Integrated Circuit Design, John Wiley & Sons. 
 

  

110 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT) Specialization 
 

  

111 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Visual Computing Specialization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

112 
 



Title Image Synthesis Number EE/CSE 7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite Computer Graphics, Digital Image Processing   

& Probability, Statistics, and Stochastic 
Processes 

Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce students to fundamentals of realistic image synthesis.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to synthesize realistic looking images for animations, simulation, 
gaming, etc. 
 
Contents  
The Goals of Rendering, Ray Tracing I: Basic Algorithm, Ray-Surface Intersection [4 Lectures]  
Ray Tracing II: Acceleration Techniques [4 Lectures] 
 
The Light Field, Lights and Lighting, Illumination, Camera and Film [4 Lectures] 
Sampling and Reconstruction, Aliasing and Antialiasing, Statistical Sampling [4 Lectures] 
 
Reflection Models: BRDFs, Ideal Specular and Diffuse [2 Lectures]   
Reflection Models II: Glossy, Texture, the Rendering Equation [4 Lectures]  
Materials and BRDFs, Mapping techniques, Exotic materials [4 Lectures] 
 
Monte Carlo Methods: Probability, Sampling and Variance Reduction [3 Lectures]  
Sampling Paths, Irradiance Caching and Photon Maps [5 Lectures] 
Radiosity: Form Factors, Solvers [4 Lectures]  
Meshing and Hierarchical Techniques [4 Lectures] 
 
Textbooks 
1. Akenine-Möller, T., Haines, E., & Hoffman, N. (2019). Real-time rendering. Crc Press. 
2. Hughes, J. F., Van Dam, A., Foley, J. D., McGuire, M., Feiner, S. K., & Sklar, D. F. (2014). Computer graphics: 

principles and practice. Pearson Education.  
3. Cohen, M. F., & Wallace, J. R. (2012). Radiosity and realistic image synthesis. Elsevier. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Prof. Pat Hanrahan, Computer Graphics: Image Synthesis Techniques, Stanford University: 

https://graphics.stanford.edu/courses/cs348b-00/ 
2. Prof. Ravi Raviramamoorthi, Computer Graphics, University of California, San Diego,  

https://www.youtube.com/user/raviramamoorthi/videos   
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

113 
 



Title Animation Number EE/CSE 7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering, CSE L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite Computer Graphics   
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce students to fundamentals of animation and simulation.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to use the animation techniques for physics based real time 
systems.  
 
Contents  
Core mathematics and methods for computer animation and motion simulation. [3 Lectures]  
Traditional animation techniques. [3 Lectures] 
 
Physics-based simulation methods for modeling shape and motion:  
Particle systems, constraints, rigid bodies, [4 Lectures] 
Deformable models, collisions and contact [4 Lectures] 
Fluids, and fracture. [4 Lectures]  
Animating natural phenomena. [4 Lectures] 
 
Methods for animating virtual characters and crowds [4 Lectures] 
Data-driven animation methods, realism and perception [4 Lectures] 
Animation systems, motion control [4 Lectures] 
Real-time and interactive methods [3 Lectures] 
Multi-sensory feedback. [3 Lectures] 
 
Textbooks 
1. Hughes, J. F., Van Dam, A., Foley, J. D., McGuire, M., Feiner, S. K., & Sklar, D. F. (2014). Computer graphics: 

principles and practice. Pearson Education. 
2. Parent, R. (2012). Computer animation: algorithms and techniques. Newnes. 
3. Marschner, S., & Shirley, P. (2015). Fundamentals of computer graphics. CRC Press. 
 
Self Learning Material 
Prof. Doug James, Computer Graphics: Animation and Simulation, Stanford University, 
https://graphics.stanford.edu/courses/cs348b-00/ 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

114 
 



Title Computational Photography Number EE/CSE 7XXX 
Department EE, CSE L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite Basics of Image Processing   
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce students to the computational photography fundamentals.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to design efficient algorithms for problems such as motion 
deblurring, compositing, warping and use computational cameras for intelligent sensing.  
 
Contents  
Modern optics and lenses;Radiometry and Photometry [3 lectures] 
Camera models, aperture, shutter and energy calculations motion and defocus blur [2 Lectures] 
Epsilon Photography, Single-shot Multi-domain Camera.  [4 Lectures] 
Computational Illumination: dual photography, relighting [4 Lectures] 
Retrographic Sensing for the Measurement of Surface Texture and Shape. [5 Lectures] 
Lightfields, Cameras for human-computer interaction, [3 Lectures] 
Wavelengths and colors, Hyperspectral Imaging Techniques [3 Lectures] 
Thermal cameras, high-speed [2 Lectures] 
3D range-sensing cameras and camera arrays. [4 Lectures] 
Removing camera shake and motion blur, Coded Aperture [4 Lectures] 
Color manipulation, Image compositing [3 Lectures] 
Panoramas, Warping and morphing, Motion Magnification.  [5 Lectures] 
 
Textbooks 
1. Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications, by Richard Szeliski. 
2. Multiple View Geometry in Computer Vision, by Richard Hartley and Andrew Zisserman. 
3. Reinhard, E., Heidrich, W., Debevec, P., Pattanaik, S., Ward, G., & Myszkowski, K. (2010). High dynamic 

range imaging: acquisition, display, and image-based lighting. Morgan Kaufmann. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Prof. Ramesh Raskar, Computational Camera and Photography, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 

https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/media-arts-and-sciences/mas-531-computational-camera-and-photography-
fall-2009/index.htm 

2. Prof.Ioannis (Yannis) Gkioulekas, Computational Photography, Carnegie Mellon University: 
http://graphics.cs.cmu.edu/courses/15-463/  

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

115 
 



Title Visual Perception Number EEL7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce students to the fundamentals for Visual Perception.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability of applying visual perception concepts to advance technologies 
of AR/VR, rendering, visualization, and and human computer interaction. 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Optical Information, Visual System [3 Lectures] 
Perceiving Objects and Color [3 Lectures]  
Visual System: Spatial Vision Perceiving Objects, Color[4 Lectures] 
Depth and Movements [4 Lectures]  
Spatial Vision:  Perceiving Depth and Size, Perceiving Movement [5 Lectures] 
Perceiving Scenes [3 Lectures]  
Perception Functions and Categories [5 Lectures]  
Visual Attention [5 Lectures]  
Visual Memory [2 Lectures]  
Applications  in Image Synthesis, AR/VR [4 Lectures] 
Rendering, and Visualization [4 Lectures]   
 
Textbooks 
1. Goldstein, E. Bruce, and James Brockmole (2016). Sensation and perception. Cengage Learning. 
2. Gordon, Ian E. Theories of visual perception (2004). Psychology press. 
3. DeValois, Russell L., and Karen K. DeValois (1990). Spatial vision. Oxford university press. 
4. Davies, E. R. (2004). Machine vision: theory, algorithms, practicalities. Elsevier. 
 
Self Learning Material 
Prof. Aditi Majumder, Visual Perception, University of California, Irvine, 
https://www.ics.uci.edu/~majumder/vispercep/vispercep.htm 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

116 
 



Title Image and Video Forensics Number EE7XX0 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite Digital Image Processing & Probability,   

Statistics, and Stochastic Processes 
Objectives  
The Instructor will : 
1. Introduce the framework of Image and Video Forensics. 
2. Discuss the various techniques for forgery detection in Images and Videos. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to:   
Design an appropriate method for forgery detection based on available information. 
 
 
Contents   
Image and Video Forgeries [3 Lectures]: Image formation, Types of Image and Video Forgery, Splicing, Copy-
Move, Retouching, Deep Fakes. 
Camera Finger-printing [7 Lectures]: 
 Camera Response Function, Noise [3 Lectures] 
Camera Signature,Camera Parameters based detection. [4 Lectures] 
Coding based Techniques [7 Lectures]:  
Image and Video Coding, Coding Priors, Compression Signatures [4 Lectures] 
Frame based analysis (insertion, deletion, replication, shuffling), Audio Analysis. [3 Lectures] 
Scene/Feature based Techniques [17 Lectures]:  
Gradients, Motion, Motion Blur, Defocus Blur, Depth, Noise [5 Lectures] 
Graph Matching, Illumination,  Shadow, scene-Audio correlation [4 Lectures] 
Various Priors (Color, Gradients, Natural Image) [4 Lectures] 
Transform domain features.[4 Lectures] 
Deep Fakes [7 Lectures]:  
Counter Forensics, Adversarial Network, Deep Fakes [4 Lectures] 
Motion-Audio Synchronization, Cloud based detection framework. [3 Lectures] 
 
Textbook  
1. Farid, H. (2016). Photo forensics. MIT Press.  
2. Sencar, H. T., &Memon, N. (2013). Digital image forensics. Counter-forensics: attacking image forensics, 327-

366. 
 
Self Learning Material 
Prof. Rita Singh, Computational Forensics and Investigative Intelligence, Carnegie Mellon University, 
http://forensics.cs.cmu.edu/courses/spring2018/schedule.html 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

117 
 



Title 3D Shape Analysis Number EE7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization 

Elective 
Prerequisite Fourier Analysis, Linear Algebra   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Provide students an understanding of differential geometry tools isometry, geodesics, Laplace Beltrami 
Operator, and Functional Maps.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. apply the learned geometry tools to solve practical 3D surface reconstruction problem. 
2. generate 3D printable models from the unstructured point clouds. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to Differential Geometry [5 Lectures]: Basics of differential geometry of curve and surfaces and 
estimating the quantities such as normal and curvature.   
Surface Representation and Reconstruction [9 Lectures]: 3D Surface Representation, Parametric and Non-
parametric, Implicit, Signed Distance Function [3 Lectures] 
Data structures for surface representation [1 Lectures] 
3D surface reconstruction from point clouds. [5 Lectures] 
Shape Analysis Tools [12 Lectures]:   
Isometry, geodesics on triangle meshes [4 Lectures] 
Scalar functions on shapes, discrete Laplace Beltrami operator [5 Lectures] 
Heat Diffusion on Shapes [3 Lectures] 
Shape Matching [12 Lectures]:  
3D Shape Descriptors, Rigid and Non-rigid registration [5 Lectures] 
Functional Maps, 3D Shape correspondences [5 Lectures] 
Intrinsic Symmetry [2 Lectures] 
Shape Repairing [4 Lectures]: Shape completion, generating printable 3D models from raw point clouds 
 
Textbooks  
1. Botsch, M., Kobbelt, L., Pauly, M., Alliez, P., &Lévy, B. (2010). Polygon mesh processing. CRC press. 
2. Solomon, J. (2015). Numerical algorithms: methods for computer vision, machine learning, and graphics. 

CRC press. 
3. O'neill, B. (2006). Elementary differential geometry. Elsevier. 
 
Self Learning Material  
1. Prof. Justin Solomon, Shape Analysis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 

http://groups.csail.mit.edu/gdpgroup/6838_spring_2019.html 
2. Prof. Siddhartha Chaudhuri, Digital Geometry Processing, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay: 

https://www.cse.iitb.ac.in/~cs749/spr2017/ 
Preparatory Course Material 
1. Prof. Gilbert Strang,Linear Algebra and Learning from Data, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 

https://math.mit.edu/~gs/learningfromdata/ 
 
  

118 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Socio-Digital Reality 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

119 
 



Title Multimodal Interface Number EE7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–4 [2] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Core 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce students to the multimodal signals and interfaces.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to design multimodal interface applications. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to principles of Multimodal Interfaces (2) 
Basic haptic rendering and perception experiments using haptic interfaces (3) 
AR and VR models (3) 
EEG (1) 
Eye Tracker (1) 
Gesture (Kinect) (2) 
Audio Assistance (2) 
 
Textbooks 
1. A. Bhardwaj and S. Chaudhuri, “Kinesthetic Perception: A Machine Learning Approach”, Springer 

Publishers, 2017. 
2. MC Lin and MA Otaduy (Eds), “Haptic Rendering: Foundations, Algorithms, and Applications”, AK Peters, 

Ltd; London: 2008. 
3. Aukstakalnis, Steve. Practical augmented reality: A guide to the technologies, applications, and human 

factors for AR and VR. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2016. 
 
Self Learning Material  
 
1. Prof. Gordon Wetzstein, Virtual Reality, Stanford University, https://stanford.edu/class/ee267/ 
2. Prof. Allison Okamura, Design and Control of Haptic Systems, Stanford University, 

http://web.stanford.edu/class/me327/ 
 

  

120 
 



Title Speech Understanding Number EE7XXX 
Department Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will introduce students to basic concepts and techniques that help constitute speech 
understanding 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to design systems that can process speech signals with the goal 
of extracting useful semantic signal information. 

Contents  
Automatic Speech Recognition: HMMs for Acoustic Modeling [3 Lectures]  
HMMs and Weighted Finite-State Transducers  (WFSTs), WFSTs for Speech Understanding and  Recognition,  
Basics of speech production, Tied-state HMMs [5 Lectures ] 
Feature analysis for Speech Understanding [2 Lectures] 
Viterbi decoding algorithm and the Baum-Welch training algorithm [3 Lectures] 
Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs), context-dependent triphones for acoustic modelling [5 lectures] 
Introduction to NN-based Acoustic Modeling, RNN-based models [4 Lectures] 
Natural Language Processing: Word structure, semantics (lexical semantics, WordNet and WordNet based 
similarity measures) [5 lectures] 
Classical parsing, parsing using Probabilistic Context Free Grammars and EM based approaches [5 lectures] 
Language Modelling (basic ideas, smoothing techniques), RNN-based language models [4 lectures] 
Distributional word representation, Supervised sentiment analysis [3 lectures] 
Natural language inference [3 lectures] 
 
Textbooks: 
1. Gales, M., & Young, S. (2008). The application of hidden Markov models in speech recognition. Foundations 

and Trends® in Signal Processing, 1(3), 195-304. 
2. Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin (2009). Speech and Language Processing: An Introduction to Natural 

Language Processing, Speech Recognition, and Computational Linguistics. 2nd edition. Prentice-Hall. 
 
Self Learning Material 
1. Prof. Bill MacCartney, Natural language understanding, Stanford 

University,https://web.stanford.edu/class/cs224u/ 
2. Prof. Preethi Jyothi, Automatic Speech Recognition, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, 

https://www.cse.iitb.ac.in/~pjyothi/cs753/index.html 
 

121 
 



1. Introduction 

Traditional curriculum in Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) has focused on two major areas, i.e., theory 
and systems (database, computer hardware, and operating systems). With the advent of the era of Edge 
Computing, Cloud Computing, Security, AI and Big Data, the discipline is being transformed by the 
incorporation of new emerging technologies. The discipline is becoming instrumental in solving major real-world 
problems faced by modern society such as healthcare, security, sustainability, and socio-economic challenges. 
There is a need to revamp the B.Tech program in CSE so as to prepare students to tackle problems which are 
fundamentally multidisciplinary in nature. This would improve IIT Jodhpur’s participation and contribution 
towards providing solutions for global challenges. IIT Jodhpur can become a leading source of technology 
solutions for self-reliant India. 
 
 
2. Objectives of the Program 

The objective of the B.Tech. program in Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) at IIT Jodhpur is to equip 
students to undertake careers involving challenges of working on real-world problems, while innovating with 
their core competency in computer science. The curriculum gives due importance to the foundational aspects of 
computer science, as well as develops in students the necessary engineering skills for addressing emerging 
technological challenges. The program offers flexibility in choosing elective courses for widening the 
understanding of emerging concepts and processes in different domains. Students can opt for specializations 
which provide a coherent and increasingly sophisticated understanding so as to enable them to pursue preferred 
career opportunities. The program will produce a well prepared and well-motivated workforce to undertake 
careers in research and industry involving innovation, knowledge creation, engineering, and entrepreneurship.  
 
3. Expected Graduate Attributes 

After completing this program, a student will be able to develop an ability to: 
1. Apply appropriate knowledge in Computer Science and Engineering to identify, formulate, analyze, and solve 

complex engineering problems in order to reach substantive conclusions. 
2. Self-learn and engage in use of advanced computing tools. 
3. Develop sustainable computing solutions in broader economic, societal and environmental contexts. 
4. Think critically, creatively and analytically as a computer scientist, whilst being able to work effectively, 

independently and collaboratively as part of a team in research, technology development and entrepreneurial 
ventures.  

5. Apply evolving ethics and privacy laws across various domains and territories. 
6. Effectively communicate engineering concepts and ideas to peers in written or oral forms. 
7. Be motivated to engage in independent and life-long learning in the broadest context of evolving technological 

challenges.  
 

4. Learning Outcomes 

The student will have the ability to: 
1. Abstract out computational models based on mathematical rigor.  
2. Critically analyse and appreciate emerging and applied fields of computer science owing to deeper 

understanding and strong foundations in theoretical computer science. 
3. Develop robust, secure, and efficient software systems that would involve software engineering, data 

structures, and algorithm design paradigms. 
4. Apply different concepts including digital design, computer architecture, operating systems, databases, 

networking, and applications for building solutions for real-world problems. 
5. Design and implement smart, intelligent, and user friendly interfaces for computer applications.  
6. Analyse, design, develop and deploy computer based systems in collaboration with domain experts for 

meeting societal needs in areas such as healthcare, safety, environment, law enforcement, transportation, etc., 
by exploiting tools and techniques of Big data, AI and project management. 

7. Become proficient in some of the specialized areas such as Computer Vision, Augmented Reality, Internet of 
Things, Natural Language Understanding, and Intelligent Communication. 

1 
 



8. Communicate effectively by comprehending, documenting, making effective presentations and exchanging 
clear instructions. 
 

5. New Skill Sets Targeted 

1. Designing user-centric human-machine interfaces 
2. Designing end-to-end socio-digital reality systems 
3. Developing sustainable computing solutions 
4. Building secure, intelligent, and trustable systems  
5. Designing and synthesizing digital systems for solving industrial problems 
 
6. Topic Clouds and Mapping of Topic Clouds with Proposed Courses 

Table 1. Topics and Mapping of Topic with Courses 

Area Topics Category Course (IE/IS/ 
(Core/ PC/PE) 
Techniques 
Technology/ 
Systems) 

Theory Computing Paradigms, Syntax, Semantics Specification,  Core Principles of 
and Attribute Grammar, Imperative Programming, Procedures, Programming 

Algorithms Modules, Object-oriented Programming, Abstraction, Languages 
Encapsulation, Reuse, Functional Programming, Polymorphic (PC) 
Data Types, Recursion, Lambda Calculus, Logic Programming, 
Horn Clauses, Backtracking, Concurrent Programming, 
Synchronization, Multithreads 

Abstract Data Types, Linear Data Structures, Non Linear Data Core Data 
Structures, Stack, Queue, Link List, Heap, Sorting, Hashing, Structures and 
Algorithm Analysis, Graph, Tree Algorithms 

(PC) 

Complexity Analysis, Divide-and-conquer, Greedy Core Design and 
Algorithms, Dynamic Programming, Linear Programming, Analysis of 
Universal Hashing, Approximation Algorithms, Randomized Algorithms 
Algorithms (PC) 

Discrete Structures, Logics, Set, Graph and Trees, Deterministic Core Maths for 
Finite Automata, Non-deterministic Finite Automata, Computing 
PushDown Automata, Context Free Grammar, Turing (PC) 
Machine, Lexical and Syntax Analysis, Parsing 

Computability, Decision Trees and Communication Core Theory of 
Complexity, Time Complexity, Space Complexity, Complexity Computation 
of Counting and Randomization (PE) 

Graph algorithms, Directed and Undirected graph, Planar Core Graph 
graph, Graph coloring, Hamiltonion and Eulorian graph, Theoretic 
Bipartite graphs, Trees. Algorithms 

(PC Bouquet) 

NP-Hard problems, Bounded Search Tree, Iterative Core Parameterized 
Compression, Randomized Methods, Kernelization, Sunflower Complexity 
Lemma, Crown Decomposition, Expansion Lemma, (PC Bouquet) 
Intractability 

2 
 



Persistence DS, Retroactive DS, Geometric DS, DS for Moving Core and Advanced 
Data, Dynamic Optimality, Cache-oblivious DS, van Emde Techniques Data 
Boas, Sketching, String DS, Low Memory DS, Dynamic Graphs Structures (PE) 

Euclidean TSP, Metric TSP, FPTAS, PTAS, Primal-Dual Techniques Approximatio
Schema, Dual Fitting, Embeddings, Sparsest Cut, Random n Algorithms 
Hyperplanes, Hashing, Makespan (PE) 

Randomized Complexity Classes, Probabilistic Analysis, Techniques Randomized 
Markov Chain, Random Walk, Randomized Graph Algorithms 
Algorithms, Randomized Sorting and Searching, Markov, (PE) 
Chebyshev, Chernoff 

Computational Model and Complexity Classes, NP, NP Core Complexity 
Completeness, Complexity Issues in Cryptography, Lower Theory (PE) 
Bounds, Algebraic Computational Model, Levin’s Theory, 
Hardness Amplification, Logic in complexity theory, Circuit 
Lower Bounds 

Complex Numbers, Complex Vector Spaces, Quantum Core Quantum 
Algorithms, Quantum Programming Languages, Quantum Computing 
Cryptography, Quantum Information Theory, Deutsch’s (PE) 
Algorithm, Simon’s Periodicity Algorithm, Grover’s Search 
Algorithm, The Deutsch–Jozsa Algorithm, Shor’s Factoring 
Algorithm, Quantum Assembly Programming, Quantum Key 
Exchange, Quantum Teleportation, von Neumann Entropy  

Streaming Algorithms, Stream mining using Clustering, Core and Stream 
Massive Data Clustering, Data Stream Classification, Technique Analytics (PE) 
Distributed Mining of Streaming Data, Change Diagnosis, 
Forecasting on Stream, Dimensionality Reduction for 
Streaming data.  

Hardware Introduction to HDL, Design flow, Number representation, Core Digital Design 
Arithmetic circuits, Design and Analysis of Synchronous (PC) 
circuits, Design of Finite State Machines, CMOS Technology, 
Programmable Logic Devices, CAD 

CPU, Memory, Processor, Instruction set Architecture, I/O, Core Computer 
ALU, Bus Architecture, Cache management, Performance Architecture 

(PC) 

Embedded system design, Architectures of embedded Systems Embedded 
processors, Hardware-Software Co-design, ARM Cortex M3, Systems (PC 
Programming for Embedded Systems, Real time OS, Bouquet) 
Distributed Embedded Architectures, Real time scheduling 
algorithms, Multi-rate systems 

VLSI design flow, hardware modelling principles, hardware Technique High-level 
description, Behavioural synthesis, logic optimization and Synthesis (PE) 
synthesis, Chip architectures, standard cells and FPGA, 
Synthesis tools, layout synthesis 

3 
 



Systems Processes Management, Process Coordination, Deadlock,  Core Operating 
Memory Management, Storage Management, Protection and Systems  (PC) 
Security 

Database Architectures, Data Granularity, ER Model, EER Core Database 
Model, Relational Model, Relational Algebra, Relational Systems (PC) 
Calculus, SQL, Schema, Query, Data Definition, Data 
Manipulation, Data Retrieval, Views, Normalization, 
Functional Dependency, Transactions, Schedules, ACID 
Properties, Concurrency Control, Recoverability, 
Serializability, Deadlock Prevention, Locking Protocols, 
Timestamp Protocols, Deadlock Detection, Recovery Protocols, 
Query Optimization, Hashing, Indexing 

Software Development Life Cycle, Software Engineering Core Software 
Process Model, Software Design, UML, Design Pattern, Project Engineering 
Management, Cost Analysis, UI Design, Service Oriented (PC) 
Architecture, Software Quality, Risk Analysis, Agile 
Methodologies, Software Architecture 

Software Testing, Quality Engineering, Testing Process, Techniques Software 
Automatic Testing, Unit Testing, Defect Prevention, Process Testing and 
Improvement, Quantifiable Quality Improvement, Quality Quality 
Model and Measurements, Defect Classification, Reliability Assurance (PE) 
Engineering  

Distributed Systems, Centralized Systems, Data Transparency, Systems Distributed 
Data Fragmentation, Data Allocation, Security, Semantic Database 
Integrity, Query Decomposition, Query Localization, Query Systems (PE) 
Ordering, Query Optimization, Transaction Management, 
Concurrency Control, Deadlock Management, Reliability, 
Recovery Protocols 

Fog Computing, Internet of Things and Analytics, Edge Systems Edge and Fog 
Computing, Distributed computing and system design, Computing 
architecture, contemporary cloud framework, distributed data (PE) 
& processing management, middleware design issues and 
challenges, Edge & Fog for AI-driven applications  

Concurrency, events & ordering, distributed file systems, Systems Distributed 
distributed disk management, fault tolerance, microkernel, Systems (PE) 
operating system kernel 

 Understanding Software & Evolution, Software Maintenance, Systems Software 
Software Reuse, Reverse engineering levels & techniques Maintenance 

(PE) 

Network Cyber Security Vulnerabilities and Cyber Security Safeguards, Core Cyber Security 
and Securing Web Application, Services and Servers, Intrusion (PC) 
Security Detection and Prevention, Firewalls, Cyberspace and the Law, 

Cyber Forensics 

OSI reference model, Packet switching techniques, Core Computer 
Performance metrics, Socket programming, Email, FTP, Telnet, Networks (PC) 
SSH, DNS, TCP, UDP, Transmission, Flow and Congestion 
Control, Tunneling, Internet Protocol and its operation, 
Routing algorithms, ICMP, ARP, RARP, DHCP, IPv6, RIP, 

4 
 



OSPF, Advanced Internetworking, Multicast routing, framing, 
medium access mechanism, Public key and private key 
cryptography,  Firewalls, SDN Overview. 

Overview about MANETs, VANETs, WSNs and WMNs, Systems Introduction to 
Modulation techniques at PHY layer, Fading mitigation Wireless Ad 
techniques, MAC protocols for MANETs, Error correcting hoc Network 
codes, distributed wireless routing algorithms, transport level (PE) 
mobility management, 5G overview, LPWAN, Bluetooth 

Digital Trust, Digital Asset, Digital Transactions, Distributed Technology Introduction to 
Ledger Technology, Digital Signature, Cryptocurrency, Blockchain 
Bitcoin, Hyperledger, Ethereum Interaction, Blockchain-as-a- (PE) 
service, Blockchain Use Cases, Blockchain Security 

Cooperative    Vehicular Safety Applications, Vehicular Systems Vehicular Ad-
Mobility Modeling, Physical Layer Considerations for Hoc Networks 
Vehicular Communications, MAC Layer of Vehicular (PE) 
Communication Networks, VANET Routing protocols, 
Emerging VANET Applications, Standards and Regulations 

Overview of wireless systems, Multiplexing, Link adaptation, Technology Mobile and 
Multihop routing protocols, Mobility and Handoff Pervasive 
management, Cellular Technologies, Overview of LTE and 5G Computing 
Cellular Networks, 5G Architecture, RAN and dynamic (PE) 
CRAN, Mobility management and Network slicing in 5G, 
Pervasive computing, Context aware sensor networks, 
Localization, Android architecture and Overview, Body area 
networks 

4G LTE networks, From 4G to 5G, 5G overview,  core, Technology 5G Mobile 
signalling, 5G mobile edge and fog computing, application, 5G Networks (PE) 
vs mm-wave WiFi, India’s 5G policy and vision, 6G vision, 
paper discussions  

Networking basics, switching architecture, SDN architectures, Core Software 
OpenFlow, Network function virtualization, Emerging SDN Defined 
models, Data center networking Networks (PE) 

Basic symmetric-key encryption, Message integrity, Public key Core Cryptography 
cryptography, Digital signatures ,Protocols and Network 

security (PE) 

 Bayes Decision Theory, Regression, Bias variance, Maximum Core and Pattern 
Applicatio Likelihood Estimation, Bayesian Parameter Estimation, Technique Recognition 
ns Decision Tree, Random Forest, Artificial Neural Network, and Machine 

Clustering, k-means, SVM, Feature Selection, Dimensionality Learning (PC) 
Reduction 

Uninformed Search Strategies, Informed Search Strategies, Technique Artificial 
Local Search Algorithms, Hill Climbing, Constraint Intelligence 
Satisfaction Problems, Backtracking, Adversarial Search, Min- (PE) 
Max algorithms, Propositional Logic, Reasoning Patterns, 
First-order logic, Syntax, Semantics, Q-value, Policy,  

5 
 



Search Engine Architecture, Retrieval Models, Performance Techniques Information 
Evaluation, Text Categorization, Text Clustering, Web Retrieval (PE) 
Information Retrieval, Structured Document Retrieval  

Visual World, Geometry, Lights and Optics, Tracking, Technique Introduction to 
Motion, Depth, Devices and tools AR and VR 

(PE) 

Geometric primitives, Clipping, Viewing, Rendering, Technique Computer 
Animation, Shading, Coloring, OpenGL Graphics (PE) 

Eye and early vision, Reasoning systems, Late vision, visual Technique Principles of 
attention, Cognitive architectures, Knowledge representation Biological 
and learning, Neural networks for vision, Applications in Vision and 
vision tasks Applications 

(PE) 

Image formation and transformations, Camera calibration, Technique Computer 
Image restoration, Spatial and Wavelet-based processing, Vision (PE) 
Epipolar Geometry, SfM, Optical flow, Key-point detection, 
Feature description and matching, Deep learning for vision, 
Applications 

Data storage methods, data access methods, analysis, Technique Data 
representation, visualization, visual storytelling, Dashboard, Visualization 
Infographics (PE) 

Neural Networks, Gradient Descent, Optimization, Technique Deep Learning 
Regularization, Autoencoder, Convolutional Neural Network, (PE) 
Recurrent Neural Network, LSTM, Deep Generative Models, 
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN), Deep Belief Network, 
Deep Convolutional GAN, Variational Autoencoder, 
Representation Learning, Unsupervised Pre-training, Transfer 
Learning, Distributed Representation, Domain Adaptation, 
Neural Language Model, Adversarial Learning 

Kernel Machines, Variants of Support Vector Machines, PAC Core and Advanced 
Theory, Boosting, Graphical Models, Structural Predictions, Technique Machine 
Deep Reinforcement Learning, Space Coding Learning (PE) 

Decision-making, Utility Theory, Utility Functions, Decision Core Advanced 
Networks, Sequential Decision Problems, Partially Observable Artificial 
MDP, Game Theory, Reinforcement Learning, Generalization, Intelligence  
Policy Search, Hidden Markov Model, Kalman Filter, (PE) 
Knowledge Representation,  Ontological Engineering, 
Situation Calculus, Semantic Networks, Description Logic, 
Planning graphs, Partial-order Planning, Conditional 
Planning, Continuous Planning, Multi-agent Planning, 
Hierarchical Task Network Planning, Non-deterministic 
Domains 

Neuromorphic Engineering, Neuroanatomy of human brain, Technique Neuromorphic 
Neuron models, Plasticity rules, Learning rules, Spiking Design and 
Neural Networks (SNN), Nanodevices for Neuron Computing 
Implementation, Synaptic emulation, Electronic synapses, (PE) 
Digital/Analog neuromorphic VLSI, Hardware 
implementation of synaptic circuits, Synaptic programming 

6 
 



Accuracy-explainability tradeoff, Interpretability problem, Technique Dependable 
Predictability, Transparency, Traceability, Causality, Artificial 
Reasoning, Attention and Saliency, Interpretable AI, Prediction Intelligence 
Consistency, Adversarial Robustness, Trustworthy AI, (PE) 
Integrity, Reproducibility, Accountability, Bias-free AI, Ethics 
in AI 

Fuzzy Computing, Fuzzy Systems, Neural Computing, Genetic Technique Soft 
Algorithms, Rough Sets, Knowledge Representations, Computing 
Fuzzification, Defuzzification, Swarm Intelligence, Hybrid Techniques 
Models, Neuro-fuzzy systems, Rough-neural computing (PE) 

Biological Signals, Biomedical Imaging Modalities, ECG, NMR Technique Bio-image 
spectroscopy, electron microscopy, MRI, and X-Ray Images, Computing 
Visualization, Reconstruction, Restoration, Clustering, Graph (PE) 
Partitioning, Deep Learning for Bio-image 

Biometric Devices, Biometric System Design, Biometric Data Technique Advanced 
Analysis, Face Recognition, Fingerprint Matching, Signature Biometrics 
Authentication, Biometric  (PE) 

Computational complexity of AI models, Prediction accuracy, Systems and Resource-
Numeric accuracy, Precision, Memory footprints, Edge AI, Technique Constrained 
Memory Optimization of Models, Hardware accelerators for Artificial 
Edge AI, Vision Processing Unit, Streaming Hybrid Intelligence 
Architecture Vector Engine, Open Neural Network Exchange  (PE) 

Word representation, NLP tasks, Seq2Seq model, Question Technique Natural 
Answering, Sentiment Analysis, Dialogue system, Machine Language 
Translation, natural language generation Interpretability, Understanding 
Knowledge Graphs.  (PE)  

Spoken language technology, dialog and conversational Techniques Speech 
systems, automatic speech recognition, speech synthesis, affect Understanding 
detection, dialogue management. (PE)  

Graphs, Network Models, Network Data Generation, Technique Social 
Structural Properties, Link Prediction, Community Detection, Networks (PE) 
Information Cascade, Small World Phenomenon, Homophily, 
Structural Balance, Components, Network Evolution, Multi-
layer network 

  
 

  

7 
 



7. Course Categories, Credit Distribution and Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 

Table 2. Proposed Course Categories and credit distribution in the proposed B.Tech. Programmes  

S.N Course Type Course Category Regular B.Tech. Double 
. B.Tech. 

Credit Total Credit Total 

1 Institute Core (I) Engineering (IE) 34 69 34 59 
  

Science (IS) 16 16 

Humanities (IH) 12 9 

2 Programme Linked Science (LS) 7 0 
(L) 

3 Programme Core (P) Programme Compulsory (PC) 51 71 51 71 

Programme Electives (PE) 17 17 

B.Tech. Project (PP) 3 3 

4 Open (O) Open Electives (OE) 10 10 0 0 

5 Engineering Science Engineering Science Core (EC) 0 0 22 22 
(E) 

Engineering Science Elective (EE) 0 0 8 8 

Total Graded 150  160 

6 Non-Graded (N) Humanities (NH) 6 15 6 15 

Engineering (NE) 3 3 

Design/Practical Experience (ND) 6 6 

Total Graded + Non-Graded  165  175 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 



 
8. Credit Structure of B.Tech. Programmes 

Table 3. Credit Structure for B.Tech. Programmes (Up 6000 Level) 

Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact Total Credits 
hours (TC=TH/3) 

Contact Hours Beyond Contact Total Hours 
(CH) Hours (BCH) (TH) 

1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1 

1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 hr 2 hr 3hr 1 

1 hour of Lab/Project 0-0-1 1 hr 0.5 hr 1.5 hr 0.5 

#Contact hour for a project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 



9. List of Programme Compulsory Courses 

Table 4. Programme Compulsory Courses 

Sr. No Course Name LTP Contact Hours Credit 

1 Data Structure and Algorithms 3-0-2 5 4 

 2 Maths for Computing 3-1-0 4 4 

3 Digital Design  2-0-2 4 3 

4 Human-Machine Interaction 0-0-4 4 2 

5 Software Engineering 3-0-2  5 4 

6 Operating Systems 3-0-2 5 4 

7  Design and Analysis of Algorithms 3-1-0 4 4 

8 Computer Architecture  3-0-0 3 3 

9 Database Systems 3-0-2 5 4 

10 Cyber Security 3-0-2 5 4 

11 Computer Networks 3-0-3 5 4.5 

12 Digital Systems LAB  0-0-3 3 1.5 

13  Principles of Programming Languages 3-0-0 3 3 

14a Randomized Algorithms (B1) 3-0-0 3 3 

14b Approximation Algorithms (B1) 3-0-0 3 3 

14c Distributed Algorithms (B1) 3-0-0 3 3 

14d Optimization (B1) 3-0-2 5 4 

15a VLSI Design (B2) 3-0-0 3 3 

15b High-Level Synthesis (B2) 3-0-0 3 3 

15c Embedded Systems (B2) 3-0-0 3 3 

Total 51/52 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 



10. Area-wise Programme Elective Courses 

Table 5. Stream-wise Programme Electives Courses 

S. No. Stream Courses L-T-P 

1 Theory and 1. Randomized Algorithms (700) 3-0-0 
Algorithms 2. Approximation Algorithms (700)   

3. Complexity Theory (400) 
4. Advanced Data Structures (400) 
5. Quantum Computing (400) 
6. Graph-theoretic Algorithms (700) 
7. Parameterized Complexity (700) 
8. Optimization (Math) (400) 

2 Hardware  1. High-level Synthesis (EE/CS)(700) 3-0-0 
2. Embedded Systems (EE)   

3. VLSI Design (EE) 
4. Hardware Software Co-Design (CS) (700) 

3 Systems 1. Software Testing and Quality Assurance (700) 3-0-0 
2. Distributed Database Systems (700)  
3. Distributed Systems (2-0-0) (400)  
4. Mobile and Pervasive Computing (700)  
5. Virtualization and Cloud Computing (700)  
6. Compiler Design (700)  
7. Software Maintenance (400)   2-0-2 

4 Network and 1. Introduction to Wireless Ad hoc Network (700) 3-0-0 
Security 2. 5G Mobile Networks(CS)(700)  

3. Software Defined Networks (CS)(700) 2-0-0 

4. Intelligent Radio Networks (EE) (700) 3-0-2 

5. Data Communication Networks (EE) (300) 
6. Cryptography and Network Security (CS/EE) (400) 
7. Introduction to Blockchain (700) 

5 AI-ML 1. Deep Learning (400) 3-0-0 
 2. Artificial Intelligence (400)     

3. Advanced Machine Learning 
4. Dependable Artificial Intelligence (400) 
5. Information Retrieval (700) 
6. Autonomous Systems (IDRP) (400) 
7. Ethics, Policy, Law and Regulation in AI (700) 
8. Planning and Decision making for Robots 

(IDRP)(700) 

6 Speech,Text, 1. Natural Language Understanding (700)  3-0-0 
and Vision 2. Digital Image Processing (400) 
  3. Computer Vision (400) 

4. Computer Graphics (400) 
5. Speech Understanding (700) 

11 
 



7 Social 1. Social Computing  3-0-0 
Computing 2. Sustainable Computing  3-0-0 

3. ICT for Development  2-0-0 
4. Machine Learning for Epidemiology  3-0-0 
5. Health Informatics  3-0-0 
6. Computational Social Choice  3-0-0 
7. Computational Cognition & Behavior Modelling 3-0-0 
8. Social Networks  3-0-0 
9. Ethics, policy, law and regulations in AI 0-0-2 
10. Crowd-sourcing and human computing 3-0-0 
11. Environmental Informatics 3-0-0 
12. Computational Microeconomics 3-0-0 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 



11. Specializations Offered by the Department 
Table 6. Specializations and courses 

Name of Specialization Core (8 
S. No. Specialization Elective (12 Credits) 

Specialization Credits) 

Visual Computing 
1. Jointly with EE and AIDE Jointly with EE and AIDE 

(CSE, AIDE, EE) 

Socio-Digital Reality 
2. Jointly with EE and AIDE Jointly with EE and AIDE   

(CS, AIDE, EE) 

Randomized Algorithms, Approximation 
Advanced Data Structures Algorithms, Theory of Computation,  

Advanced (3-0-0), Complexity Theory Distributed Algorithms, Quantum 
3. 

Algorithms  (3-0-0), Algorithms for Big Computing (IDRP), Optimization, Graph 
Data (from M.Tech, 2-0-0) Theory and Applications, Parameterized 

Complexity 

Machine Learning for Epidemiology (3-0-
0), Health Informatics (3-0-0), 
Computational Social Choice (3-0-0), 

Social Computing (3-0-0), 
Computational Cognition & Behavior 

Social and  Sustainable Computing (3-
Modelling (3-0-0), Social Networks (3-0-0), 

4. Sustainable 0-0), 
Ethics, Policy, Law and regulations in 

Computing  ICT for Development (2-0-
AI(0-0-2), Crowd-sourcing and human 

0) 
computing (3-0-0), Environmental 
Informatics (3-0-0), Computational 
Microeconomics (3-0-0), Project (0-0-6) 

Intelligent 
Communication and 

5. Jointly with EE Jointly with EE 
Networking  
(CS, AIDE, EE) 

VLSI Systems  
6. Jointly with EE Jointly with EE 

(EE, CS) 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

13 
 



12. Curriculum of B.Tech. in Computer Science and Engineering (Direct Entry) 

Table 7. Curriculum of B.Tech. (Computer Science and Engineering) 

Cat Course LTP C N G Cat Course LTP C N G
H C C H C C 

  I Semester   II Semester 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IE Engineering 2-1-0 3 - 3 
Electrical Mechanics 
Engineering 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Chemistry  3-0-0 3 - 3 
Computer Science 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Physics  3-0-0 3 - 3 
Bioengineering 

      IS Chemistry Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1 

      IS Physics Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1 

IS Mathematics I  3-1-0 4 - 4 IS Mathematics II 3-1-0 4 - 4 

IE Engineering 0-0-2 2 - 1 IE Engineering 0-0-2 1 - 1 
Visualization Realization 

NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - NE Engineering Design 0-0-2 2 1 - 
Design I  II  

NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - 
Skill I  Skill II  

NH Social Connect and 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Social Connect and 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 
responsibilities I responsibilities II 

NH Performing Arts I 0-0-1 1 0.5 - NH Performing Arts 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 
/Sports I  II/Sports II 

Total 12-1- 27 3 17 Total 11-2- 24 3 16 
14 12 

  III Semester   IV Semester 

IS Probability, 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Materials Science & 1-0-0    1 - 1 
Statistics and Engineering 
Stochastic (Electronic 
Processes materials) 

14 
 



IE MSE -  2X 1- 2 - 2 IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4 
(i) Energy materials  0-0 
(ii) Computational  
Material Design 

IE Signals and 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Pattern Recognition 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Systems and Machine 

Learning 

PC Maths for 3-1-0 4   4 PC Software 3-0-2 5   4 
Computing Engineering 

PC Data Structures 3-0-2 5 - 4 PC Human-Machine 0-0-4 4   2 
and Algorithms Interaction 

LS Foundations of 3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Digital Design 2-0-2 4   3 
Quantum 
Information 
Processing 
(Program Linked 
Science Elective) 

NE Intro. To Profession 0-0-2 2 1   IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3   3 

Total 17-3- 24 1 21 Total 15-1- 23 - 21 
4 10 

  V Semester   VI Semester 

PC Design and 3-1-0 4   4 PC Cyber Security 3-0-2 5   4 
Analysis of 
Algorithms 

PC Computer 3-0-0 3   3 PC Computer Networks 3-0-3  6   4.5 
Architecture 

PC Operating Systems 3-0-2 5   4 PC Digital Systems Lab 0-0-3 3  1.5 

PC Principles of 3-0-0 3   3 PC CS Core Bouquet -1 3-0-0 3   3 
Programming (Algorithms)/ 2 
Languages (Hardware)  

PC Database Systems 3-0-2 5  4       

IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3 PE Programme/Open 6-0-0 6   6 
Elective 

NH Professional Ethics 0-1-0   1 - NH Professional Ethics 0-0-2   1 - 
I II 

Total 18-2- 23 1 21 Total 15-1- 23 1 19 
4 8 

  VII Semester   VIII Semester 

15 
 



PP B. Tech. Project 0-0-6 6 - 3 IH Humanities IV 3-0-0 3 - 3 

PC CS Core Bouquet-1 3-0-0 3   3       
(Algorithms)/2 
(Hardware)  

PE Programme/Open 6-0-0 6 - 6 PE Programme/Open 15-0- 15 - 15 
/ Electives / Electives 0 

OE OE 

IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3             

IS Environmental 2-0-0 2 - 2             
Science 

Total 14-0- 20 - 17 Total 18-0- 18 - 18 
6 0 

Total of Graded Credits - 15
0 

Total of  Non-Graded Credits 9 - 

Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 

Grand Total 165 

 
  

  

16 
 



13. Curriculum of Double B.Tech.: B.Tech. in Computer Science and Engineering and B.Tech. in 
Engineering Science 

Table 8. Programme structure of Double B.Tech. 

Ca Course LTP C N G Ca Course LTP C N GC 
t H C C t H C 

  I Semester   II Semester 

First two semesters same as Table 8a or 8 b 
33 Graded and 6 non graded credits 

  III Semester   IV Semester 

ES Probability, 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Materials Science & 3 × 3 - 3 
Statistics, and Engineering 1-0-0    
Stochastic Processes 

ES Modern Physics 3-0-0 3 - 3 ES Embedded Systems 3-0-2 5 - 4 
and IoT 

IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Pattern Recognition 3-0-2 5 - 4 
and Machine 
Learning 

ES Data Structures and 3-0-2 5 - 4 ES Design of 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Algorithms Experiments 

IE Signals and Systems 3-1-0 4 - 4 ES Control Systems 3-0-2 5 - 4 

NE Intro. To Profession 0-0-2 2 1   IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3 - 3 

Total 15-3-4 22 1 19 Total 18-0-6 24 - 21 

  V Semester   VI Semester 

PC Design and 3-1-0 4   4 PC Cyber Security 3-0-2 5   4 
Analysis of 
Algorithms 

PC Principles of 3-0-0 3   3 PC Computer Networks 3-0-3 6   4.5 
Programming 
Languages 

PC Operating Systems 3-0-2 5   4 PC Software 3-0-2 5   4 
Engineering 

PC Database Systems 3-0-2 5   4 PC Human-Machine 0-0-4 4   2 
Interaction 

17 
 



PC Maths for 3-1-0 4   4 PC Digital Design 2-0-2 4  3 
Computing   

      PC CS Core Bouquet - 1 3-0-0 3   3 
(Algorithms)/ 2 
(Hardware) 

IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3       

N Professional Ethics I 0-1-0   1 - N Professional Ethics II 0-1-0   1 - 
H H 

Total 18-3-4 24 1 22 Total 15-1- 29 1 20.
14 5 

  VII Semester   VIII Semester 

PP B. Tech. Project 0-0-6 6 - 3 PE Programme/Enginee 17-0-0 17 - 17 
/ ring Science 

ES Electives 

PC CS Core Bouquet -  3-0-0 3   3 IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3 
1 (Algorithms)/ 2 
(Hardware) 

PE Programme/ 12-0-0 12 - 12 PC Digital Systems Lab 0-0-3 3  1.5 
/ Engineering Science 

OE Electives 

PC Computer 3-0-0 3   3       
Architecture 

IS Environmental 2-0-0 2 - 2             
Science 

Total 20-0-6 26 - 23 Total 20-0-0 20 - 21.
5 

Total Graded Credits - 160 

Total of  Non-Graded Credits 9 - 

Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 

Grand Total 175 

Note: ES are proposed Engineering Science compulsory courses  
  

  

18 
 



14. Detailed Course Content of Programme Compulsory Courses 
 
Course Title Operating Systems Course No. CS XXX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Data Structures and Algorithms    
Objectives 

1. To learn about design principles of operating systems 
2. To do a case study of Operating System 

 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Ability to modify and compile OS 
2. Ability to solve synchronization problems in Operating Systems 

 
Contents  
Overview of Operating Systems: Types of Operating Systems, System calls and OS structure. (4 Lectures) 
Processes Management: Process, Threads, CPU scheduling. (6 Lectures) 
Process Coordination: Mutual exclusion, Mutex implementation, Semaphores, Monitors and condition 
variables, Deadlocks. (10 Lectures) 
Memory Management: Swapping, Paging, Segmentation, Virtual memory, Demand paging, Page Replacement 
algorithms. (8 Lectures) 
Storage Management: I/O devices and drivers, Disks and file Systems, File layout and directories, File system 
performance, File system reliability. (8 Lectures) 
Protection and Security: System protection, System security. (6 Lectures) 
 
Laboratory  

1. Designing a shell in Linux 
2. Multithreaded programming using pthread   
3. Solving the Sleeping-Barber problem   
4. Modification of scheduling algorithm in Linux 
5. Solving the Producer-Consumer problem over a network 
6. Finding text, data, and stack segments of a process in Linux  
7. Implementation of page replacement algorithms 
8. Changing file attributes in Linux 
9. Implementing an encrypted file system in Linux 
10. Implementing symbolic links in Linux 

 
Text Book 

1. A. SILBERSCHATZ, P.B. GALVIN, G. GAGNE (2018), Operating System Concepts, John Wiley & Sons Inc., 
10th Edition. 
 
Reference Book  

1. A.S. TANENBAUM, A.S. WOODHULL (2006), Operating Systems Design and Implementation, Pearson, 3rd 
Edition. 

2. W. STALLINGS (2017), Operating Systems Internals and Design Principles, Pearson, 9th Edition. 
 
  

19 
 



 
Course Title Human-Machine Interaction Course No. CS2xxx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 0-0-4 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech (CSE, AIDE)  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 

1. To provide a theoretical and practical understanding of human-machine interaction (HMI) design, including 
concepts of user centered and design thinking, usability, interfaces, rapid prototyping, and evaluation.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. The students will have:  
2. A broad understanding of human-machine interaction and latest technologies.  
3. Understanding of perceptual and cognitive basis of human-machine interaction.  
4. Knowledge of user centered design and techniques for rapid prototyping.  
5. Knowledge of assessing usefulness and usability of a design 
6. Introduction to approaches for gathering and analyzing interaction data, and conveying design concepts.  
 
Lectures (discussions in the lab and web-based flip pedagogy) 
1. Theories and Research Methods in HMI 
2. Understanding User Experience  
3. Foundations and Concepts of Interaction  
4. Prototyping Techniques  
5. Prototyping Evaluation  
6. Communicating User Needs and Requirements  
7. Speculative Design  
8. Case Studies  
 
Laboratory and Assignments (primary approach) 
1. Find a poorly designed item (anything). Submit either a picture or sketch and describe why it is poorly 

designed. (Week 1) 
2. Heuristic Evaluation and  Interview (Week 1) 
3. User Scenarios, Personas and Storyboards ((Week 2) 
4. User Journeys (Week 3) 
5. Wireframes: Paper and Digital Prototyping (Week 4) 
6. Prototype Evaluation Study Design (Week 5, 6) 
7. Value Sensitive Design Evaluation (Week 7, 8) 
8. Design visual Interfaces (laptop, mobile) - e.g. gesture based (Week 9, 10) 
9. Design voice interfaces  - e.g. speech chatbot (Week 11, 12) 
10. Design multimodal interactions (Week 13, 14) 

 
Text Book 

1. H. SHARP, J. PREECE, Y. ROGERS (2019), Interaction Design: Beyond Human-Computer Interaction, Wiley, 
5th Edition.  

  

20 
 



Course Title Maths for Computing Course No. CSLXXX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-1-0 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech CSE, AIDE Type Core 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
1. To learn about languages, grammars, and computation models 
2. To learn about computability 
3. To learn basics of parsing techniques  
 
Learning Outcomes: 
1. The students are expected to have the ability to: 
2. Model computer science problems using discrete mathematical structures 
3. Distinguish between computable and incomputable problems 
4. Develop understanding of properties of languages and design parsers 
 
Contents  
Discrete Structures: Can computers solve every problem? The limits of computing, Set theory, Relations and 
functions, Propositional logic, First-order logic, Counting techniques. (12 Lectures) 
Proof techniques:  Constructive, Contraposition, Contradiction; Mathematical Induction (5 Lectures) 
Graph Theory: Properties of graphs, Graph matching and coloring. (6 Lectures) 
Automata Theory: DFAs, NFAs, Equivalence of DFAs and NFAs, Closure properties of regular languages, 
Regular expressions, Equivalence of regular expressions and NFAs, Nonregular languages, Context-Free 
Grammars, Context-Free Languages. (10 Lectures) 
Turing Machine: Introduction, Designing Turing machines, The Universal Turing machine. (5 Lectures)   
Parsing Techniques: LR, LALR, Shift-Reduce parsers. (4 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 

1. M. SIPSER (2014), Introduction to the Theory of Computation, Cengage Learning, 3rd Edition. 
2. K.H. ROSEN (2018), Discrete Mathematics and its Applications, McGraw-Hill, 2018, 8th Edition.  

 
References 

1. J.E. HOPCROFT, R. MOTWANI, J.D. ULLMAN (2008), Pearson, Introduction to Automata Theory, 
Languages, and Computation, 3rd Edition. 

2. R. JOHNSONBAUGH (2017), Discrete Mathematics, Prentice Hall, 8th Edition. 
 
Self-learning material 

1. Stanford CS103:  http://web.stanford.edu/class/cs103/ 
 
 
 
  

21 
 



Course Title Design and Analysis of Algorithms Course No. CSLxxx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-1-0 [4]  
Offered for B.Tech CSE, AIDE Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Data Structures and Algorithms   
Objectives 
1. To introduce and implement various techniques for designing algorithms and advanced data structures.  
2. To learn space and time complexity analysis of algorithms.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Ability to choose and implement appropriate algorithm design techniques for solving problems.  
2. Understand how the choice of data structures and algorithm design methods impact the performance of 

programs.  
3. Ability to analyze the worst-case and average-case behaviour of algorithms in terms of time and memory 

requirements. 
 
Contents  
Reasoning About Algorithms: P, NP, NP-completeness, Reductions, Complexity analysis. (5 lectures)   
Graph Algorithms: Strongly-connected components, Kosaraju’s algorithm 1 and 2, Applications. (4 lectures)  
Greedy Techniques: Local versus Global optimality, Interval scheduling, Exchange arguments. (5 lectures)   
Divide-and-Conquer: Optimality, Recursive algorithms, Divide-and-Conquer recurrences, The Master 
Theorem and applications, Non-uniform recurrences. (6 lectures)  
Dynamic Programming: Reusing sub-computations (Sequence alignment, Bellman-Ford algorithm), 
Precomputing (Floyd-Warshall algorithm, Johnson’s algorithm), Combinatorial problems. (Knapsack) (6 
lectures)  
Linear Programming: Canonical and standard forms, Feasibility and optimization, Simplex algorithm. (5 
lectures)  
Approximation Algorithms: Relative approximations, PAS and FPAS scheduling. (4 lectures)  
Randomized Algorithms: Random guess (Quick select), Random guess with high confidence (Karger’s min-cut 
algorithm), Storing associative data (Hashing), Error bounds. (7 lectures)  
 
Text Book 

1. T. H. CORMEN, C. E. LEISERSON, R.L. RIVEST, C. STEIN (2009), Introduction to Algorithms, MIT Press, 3rd 
Edition. 
 
Reference Book 

1. J. KLEINBERG, E. TARDOS (2005), Algorithm Design, Pearson Education, 1st Edition. 
 
 
 
  

22 
 



Course Title Computer Networks Course No. CSL3xx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-3 [4.5]  
Offered for B.Tech Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Prob. Stat. and Stochastic Process   
Objectives 
1. To understand the organization of computer networks, factors influencing the performance of computer 

networks, and the reasons for having a variety of different types of networks.  
2. To understand the Internet structure, various protocols of the Internet and how these protocols address the 

standard problems of networking and the Internet. 
3. Hands-on experience on networking fundamentals through practical sessions. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Familiarity with the essential protocols of computer networks in terms of design, implementation & 

operations.  
2. Identifying various design parameters such as latency, bandwidth, error rate, throughput, and their influence 

on node/link utilization and performance 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Layer approach, Packet switching techniques, Performance metrics delay, loss, throughput, 
bandwidth delay product, latency, Basic understanding of physical and data link layer. (8 Lectures) 
Network Layer: Internetworking, Tunneling, Encapsulation, Fragmentation, Internet protocol and its 
operation, Routing algorithms distance vector and link state algorithm and Routing protocols. (8 Lectures) 
Transport Layer: Transmission Control Protocol, Flow control, Error control, Congestion control, Header, 
Services, Connection management, Timers, Congestion control; User Datagram Protocol, Introduce low latency 
protocols (WebRTC, LHLS),  Applications (IoT and FOG, Real-time applications, ad-hoc wireless protocols). (10 
Lectures) 
Applications: Network programming, Socket abstraction, Peer-to-peer architecture (P2P architecture), Client 
server architecture, DNS, HTTP, FTP, SMTP, TelNet, etc. (7 Lectures) 
Advanced Internetworking: Multicast routing, Queuing disciplines and buffer management techniques. (6 
Lectures) 
Network security: Public key and private key cryptography, Digital signature, Firewalls. (3 Lectures) 
 
Laboratory 

1. Networking hardware (Understanding cables, switches, routers, Setting up switching network, Setting up 
subnets and routing across the subnets) 

2. Socket programming - Development of client-server application using sockets (possible examples, file transfer, 
peer-peer applications, chat, network monitor etc.)  

3. Networking commands - ifconfig, route, arp, arping, ping, netstat. tcpdump, host, nslookup, dig, ftp, scp, ssh, 
finger, dhclient, dhcrelay etc.  

4. Protocol analyzer - closely looking at protocols (HTTP, TCP, UDP, ICMP, 802. 3, DHCP, DNS etc. ) headers and 
analyzing the interactions between client and server of different applications  

5. QualNet simulator/Packet Tracer (Implementation of ARQs - Stop-and-wait, Sliding Window Go Back N etc. 
Verifying operations of routing protocols, influence of congestion on end users performance, congestion control 
algorithms Reno, New Reno, Cubic, router buffer size on end users performance. 
 
Text Book 

1. K.W. ROSS, J.F. KUROSE (2016), Computer Networks: A Top Down Approach, Pearson, 7th Edition.  
Reference Books  

1. W. STALLINGS (2013), Data and Computer Communications, Pearson, 10th Edition.  
2. L.L. PETERSON, B.S. DAVIE (2020), Computer Networks: A Systems Approach, Morgan Kaufmann, 6th 

Edition. 
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 



Course Title Database Systems Course No. CSLXXX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Data Structures and Algorithms    
Objectives 
1. To understand concepts of database design, database management systems and their applications, data 

modeling, and query languages. 
2. To understand different file-structures, transaction management schemes, concurrency control processes, 

database recovery mechanisms, query processing and optimization. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Students are expected to have the ability to:  
2. Apply different data modeling methods to requirement analysis, design, and implementation of database 

systems.  
3. Deduce normalized forms for efficient relational database design. 
4. Use appropriate storage and access structures. 
5. Use techniques for transaction management, concurrency control and recovery. 
6. Analyze complexity issues of query execution. 
  
Contents 
Preliminaries: Database system concepts and architecture. (2 Lectures) 
Semantic Data Model: Entity-Relationship (ER) model, Enhanced Entity-Relationship (EER) model. (4 
Lectures) 
Relational Model and Languages: Relational data model, Relational database constraints, Relational database 
design by ER- and EER-to-relational mapping, Relational algebra and Relational calculus. (9 Lectures) 
SQL: Schema definition, Constraints, Queries, Views. (5 Lectures) 
Database Design Theory: Functional dependencies, Normalization. (5 Lectures) 
Algorithms for Query Processing and Query Optimization (5 Lectures) 
Database File Organization: Disk storage, File structures, Hashing techniques, Indexing structures. (3 
Lectures) 
Database Transaction Processing: Transaction concepts and theory, Concurrency control protocols, Database 
recovery protocols. (6 Lectures) 
Advanced Databases: Distributed databases, Object-oriented databases, Multimedia databases, Handling 
unstructured data, Big data, NoSQL databases. (3 Lectures) 
 
Laboratory 

1. Exercises in SQL covering: Data definition, Data manipulation, Data retrieval, Transaction control 
2. Exercises in PL/SQL covering procedures, functions, loops, triggers 
3. NoSQL data organization and query optimization. 

 
Text Book 

1. R. ELMASRI, S.B. NAVATHE (2017), Fundamentals of Database Systems, Pearson Education, 7th Edition. 
 
Reference Books 
1. R. RAMAKRISHNAN, J. GEHRKE (2014), Database Management Systems, McGraw-Hill, 3rd Edition. 
2. H.G. MOLINA, J. ULLMAN, J. WIDOM (2014), Database Systems: The Complete Book, Pearson, 2nd 

Edition. 
3. P. RAJ, A. RAMAN, D. NAGARAJ, S. DUGGIRALA (2015), High-Performance Big-Data Analytics: 

Computing Systems and Approaches, Springer, 1st Edition. 
4. N. SABHARWAL, S. GUPTA EDWARD (2014), Big Data NoSQL: Architecting MongoDB, CreateSpace 

Independent Publishing Platform, 1st Edition. 
5. K. BANKER, P. BAKKUM, S. VERCH, D. GARRETT, T. HAWKINS (2016), MongoDB in Action, Manning 

Publications, 2nd Edition. 
6. G. HARRISON (2015), Next Generation Databases: NoSQL and Big Data, Apress, 1st Edition. 

 
 

24 
 



Course Title Cyber Security Course No. CSL6XX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech Type  Core 
Prerequisite Computer Networks   
Objectives 
The Instructor will provide the skills needed to protect networks, secure electronic assets, prevent attacks, 
ensure the privacy of your customers, and build secure infrastructure. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. The students are expected to have the ability to: 
2. To protect data and respond to threats that occur over the Internet 
3. Design and implement risk analysis, security policies, and damage assessment 
4. An ability to apply security principles and practices to the environment, hardware, software, and human 

aspects of a system.  
 
Contents 
Introduction to Cyber Security: Internet governance – Challenges and constraints, Cyber threats. (2 Lectures) 
Cyber Security Vulnerabilities and Cyber Security Safeguards:  Cyber security, Vulnerabilities, safeguards, 
Access control, Audit, Authentication, Biometrics, Cryptography, Deception, Denial of Service Filters, Ethical 
hacking, Firewalls, Response, Scanning, Security policy, Threat management. (8 Lectures) 
Securing Web Application, Services and Servers: Basic security for HTTP applications and services, Basic 
security for SOAP services, Identity management and Web services, Authorization patterns, Security 
considerations, challenges. (8 Lectures) 
Intrusion Detection and Prevention: Intrusion detection and Prevention techniques, Anti-malware software, 
Security information management, Network session analysis, System integrity validation. (7 Lectures) 
Overview of Firewalls:  Types of firewalls, User management, VPN security protocols: - PGP and S/MIME, 
Security at transport layer- SSL and TLS, Security at network layer-IPSec. (5 Lectures) 
Cyberspace and the Law:  Cyber security regulations, Roles of international law, State and Private Sector in 
cyberspace, Cyber security standards. The INDIAN cyberspace, National cyber security policy. (6 Lectures) 
Cyber Forensics: Handling preliminary investigations, Controlling an investigation, Conducting disk-based 
analysis, Investigating information-hiding, Tracing internet access, Tracing memory in real-time. (6 Lectures) 
 
Laboratory 

1. Design and implementation of a simple client/server model and running application using sockets and 
TCP/IP. 

2. To make students aware of the insecurity of default passwords, printed passwords and passwords 
transmitted in plain text. 

3. To teach students how to use SSH for secure file transfer or for accessing local computers using port 
forwarding technique. 

4. Comparison between Telnet and SSH for Secure Connection 
5. AVISPA Tool  for the Automated Validation of Internet Security Protocols and Applications 

 
Text Book 

1. C.J. HOOFNAGLE (2016), Federal Trade Commission Privacy Law and Policy, Cambridge University Press, 
2016.   
 
Self Learning Material  

1. P.W. SINGER, A. FRIEDMAN (2014), Cybersecurity: What Everyone Needs to Know, OUP, 1st Edition. 
2. L. THAMES, D. SCHAEFER (2017), Cybersecurity for Industry 4.0, Springer, 1st Edition.  
3. N. HASSAN, R. HIJAZI (2017), Digital Privacy and Security Using Windows, Apress, 1st Edition. 

 
 
 
 
 

25 
 



Course Title Computer Architecture Course No. CSLXXX/EELXXX 
Department CSE and EE Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. CSE Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
1. To understand aspects of computer architecture and program performance 
2. To provide essential understanding of different subsystems of modern computer system and design aspects 

these subsystems 
3. To introduce hands-on experience of computer architecture design and performance enhancement  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. The students are expected to have the ability to: 
2. Ability to identify the basic components and design of a computer, including CPU, memories, and 

input/output units 
3. Ability to identify the issues involved in the instruction execution and various stages of instruction life stage 
4. Ability to identify the issues related to performance improvement 
 
Contents  
Introduction: Basic computer organization, Components of computer systems, information representation. (3 
Lectures) 
Central Processing Unit: Arithmetic and Logic Unit; Instruction sets; RISC, CISC, and ASIC/ASIP paradigms; 
Various addressing modes; Assembly language programming; Instruction interpretation: micro-operations and 
their RTL specification; CPU design, Hardwired and microprogrammed, Performance issues: Parallel 
processing, Pipelining, Hazards, Advanced parallelization techniques. Cache Coherence protocols, Multicore 
Architecture (16 Lectures) 
Memory Hierarchy: Memory organization, Various levels of memory architecture and their working principles, 
Cache memory, Writing strategy, Coherence, Performance issues and enhancement techniques for memory 
design. (14 Lectures) 
Interfacing: I/O transfer techniques: Program controlled, Interrupt controlled and DMA; Introduction to 
computer buses, Peripherals and current trends in architecture. (9 Lectures) 
 
Text Books 

1. D.A. PATTERSON, J.L. HENNESSY (2008), Computer Organization and Design, Morgan Kaufmann, 4th 
Edition.  

2. W. STALLINGS (2015), Computer Organization and Architecture: Designing for Performance, Pearson 
Education India, 10th Edition. 
 
References 

1. A.S. TANENBAUM (2013), Structured Computer Organization, Prentice Hall of India, 6th Edition. 
2. V.C. HAMACHER, Z.G. VRANESIC, S.G. ZAKY (2011), Computer Organization, McGraw Hill, 5th Edition. 
3. J.L. HENNESSY, D.A. PATTERSON (2017), Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach, Morgan 

Kaufmann, 6th Edition. 
4. D.V. HALL, S.S.S.P. RAO (2017), Microprocessors and Interfacing, McGraw Hall, 3rd Edition. 

 
 
  

26 
 



Course Title Software Engineering Course No. CSL2XX 
Department Computer Science & Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech CSE Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite Introduction to Computer Science   
Objectives 
1. This course focuses on engineering practices and processes that development team uses to make sure the 

team is setup for change 
2. The course introduces practices, techniques and processes that can help team build high quality software 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Able to comfortably and effectively participate in various techniques and processes for building scalable and 
high quality software. 
  
Contents  
Introduction of Software Engineering: Need for software engineering, Software quality attributes, Software 
product pipelines, Software life cycle models and processes, Requirement engineering using UML Diagrams. 
(9 Lectures) 
Software Architecture and Design: Design principles, Design Patterns, Architecture Versus Design, Modularity, 
Software Components and Connectors, Architecture Styles. (6 Lectures) 
Essence of Modern Software Engineering: Software engineering essence, Essence language, Essence kernel, 
Using essence kernel in agile development practices, Agile Principles, Agile process models through essence 
kernel, Large scale complex development Using kernel. (13 Lectures) 
Software Testing: Quality metrics, Coding style and Static analysis tools, Verification and validation, Various 
testing techniques and Test case generations. (7 Lectures) 
Software Project Management: Software versioning and Continuous integration, Project management and Risk 
analysis, Configuration management, Cost analysis and estimation. (7 Lectures) 
 
Laboratory  
Assignment/Project on Software requirement acquisition, UML diagrams, Preparing software requirement 
specification, Practicing agile methods, User story, Backlog, Test case generation, Unit testing, CI 
configurations, Cost estimation, Manpower management and Sprint analysis using Burn down charts. 
 
Text Books 

1. R.S. PRESSMAN, B.R. MAXIM (2019), Software Engineering: A Practitioner’s Approach, McGraw-Hill India, 
2019, 9th Edition. 

2. Mark Richards, Neal Ford (2020), Fundamentals of Software Architecture, O'Reilly Media, Inc. 
3. L. BASS, P. CLEMENTS, R. KAZMAN (2012), Software Architecture in Practice, Pearson, 3rd Edition. 
4. I. JACOBSON, H. LAWSON, P.W. NG, P.E. McMAHON, M. GOEDICKE (2019), The Essentials of Modern 

Software Engineering, ACM Books.  
 

  

27 
 



Course Title Principles of Programming Languages Course No. CSXXX 
Department Computer Science & Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech Type compulsory 
Prerequisites Data Structures and Algorithms, Computer   

Architectures, Operating Systems 
Objectives 
1. To introduce major programming paradigms, and principles and techniques involved in design and 

implementation of modern programming languages. 
2. To introduce frameworks for reasoning about programming languages. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. To identify the abstract syntax of any programming language 
2. To be able to analyze and critique/appreciate the inherent philosophy of different programming languages 
3. To be able to design small domain-specific languages/language features and implement them as interpreters 

or embeddings in another language. 
  
Contents 
Introduction: Study of principles of computing paradigms like imperative, functional, object-oriented and logic 
programming. (2 Lectures) 
Syntax and semantics of programming languages: Syntax and semi-formal semantic specification using 
attribute grammar. (4 Lectures) 
Imperative Programming: Location, Reference and expressions, Assignment and Control, Data types, Blocks, 
Procedures, Modules. (6 Lectures) 
Object-oriented programming: Classes, Objects, Abstraction, Encapsulation, Inheritance and software reuse. (6 
Lectures) 
Functional programming: Function as first-class objects, Higher order functions, Polymorphic data types, Type 
checking, Type inferencing, Recursion, Lambda calculus. (6 Lectures) 
Logic programming: Horn clauses, Unification, SLD resolution, Backtracking, Cuts. (6 Lectures) 
Concurrent programming: Processes, Synchronization primitives, Safety and liveness properties, Multithreaded 
programs. (6 Lectures) 
Case Studies: C++, Java, Haskell, Prolog, Python. (6 Lectures) 

  
Text Books 

1. R. SETHI (2006), Programming Languages: Concepts and Principles, Pearson, 2nd Edition. 
2. T. W. PRATT, M.V. SELKOWITZ (2000), Programming Languages: Design and Implementation, Pearson, 4th 

Edition. 
 
Reference Books 

1. B.J. MacLENNAN (1999), Principles of Programming Languages: Design, Evaluation and Implementation, 
Oxford University Press, 3rd Edition. 

2. M. BEN-ARI (2005), Principles of Concurrent and Distributed Programming, Pearson, 2nd Edition. 
3. J.C. MITCHELL (1996), Foundations for Programming Languages, MIT Press. 
4. B.C. PIERCE (2002), Types and Programming Languages, MIT Press, 1st Edition. 
5. H.P. BARENDREGT (2014), The Lambda Calculus: Its Syntax and Semantics, North-Holland, 2nd Edition.  
6. D.P. FRIEDMAN, M. WAND (2008), Essentials of Programming Languages, MIT Press, 3rd Edition. 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

28 
 



15. Detailed Course Content of Programme Elective Courses 
 

Core Bouquet - 1 

1. Randomized Algorithms  7xx 
2. Approximation Algorithms 7xx 
3. Distributed Algorithms 7xx 
4. Graph Theoretic Algorithms 7xx 
5. Parameterized Complexity 7xx  
6. Optimization (Mathematics) 4xx 

 
 
 
 
 
  

29 
 



Course Title Randomized Algorithms Course No. CS7xxx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech CSE, AIDE Type Bouquet/Elective 
Prerequisite Design and Analysis of Algorithms,   

Probability, Statistics and Stochastic Processes 
Objectives  

1. This course presents basic concepts in the design and analysis of randomized algorithms.   
  
Learning Outcomes  

1. Familiarity with several of the main thrusts of work in randomized algorithms. 
2. Ability to read current research publications in the area. 
3. Ability to use randomized algorithm techniques for real world problems.  

  
Contents   
Tools and Techniques: Basic probability theory; Randomized complexity classes; Game-theoretic techniques; 
Markov, Chebyshev, and moment inequalities; Limited independence; Tail inequalities and the Chernoff 
bound; Conditional expectation; The probabilistic method; Markov chains and random walks; Algebraic 
techniques; Probability amplification and derandomization. (22 Lectures)   
Applications: Sorting and searching; Data structures; Combinatorial optimization and graph algorithms; 
Geometric algorithms and linear programming; Approximation and counting problems; Parallel and 
distributed algorithms; Online algorithms.  (20 Lectures)  

  
Text Books  

1. R. MOTWANI, P. RAGHAVAN (1995), Randomized Algorithms, Cambridge University Press, 1st Edition.  
  
Reference Books 

1. M. MITZENMACHER, E. UPFAL (2017), Probability and Computing: Randomized Algorithms and 
Probabilistic Analysis, Cambridge University Press, 2nd Edition. 

2. W. FELLER (2008), An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications, Volumes I and II, John Wiley, 
2nd Edition. 

3. P. BILLINGSLEY (2012), Probability and Measure, John Wiley. 
 
Self Learning 

1. https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-856j-randomized-algorithms-
fall-2002/lecture-notes/.  
 

  

30 
 



 
Course Title Approximation Algorithms Course No. CS7xxx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech CSE, AIDE Type Bouquet/Elective 
Prerequisite Design and Analysis of Algorithms   
Objectives  

1. The objective of the course is to introduce general-purpose techniques for large classes of intractable 
optimization problems.  
  
Learning Outcomes 
Students will be able to: 
1. Identify novel and significant open research questions in the field. 
2. Apply their knowledge in the design and implementation of viable solutions to those problems. 
 
Contents 
Combinatorial Techniques: Metric TSP, Euclidean TSP, FPTAS for knapsack, Greedy algorithms for makespan, 
PTAS for makespan, Local search: The Min degree spanning tree problem. (10 Lectures)    
Linear Programming Relaxations: Linear programming: Vertex cover, Set cover via Dual fitting, Set cover via 
the Primal-Dual schema, Steiner forest, Facility location. (10 Lectures)   
Cuts, Metrical Relaxations, and Embeddings: Basic embedding results and applications, Tree embeddings: Buy 
at bulk network design and L1 embeddings, Min multicut and metrical relaxation for sparsest cut, Rounding 
for sparsest cut via L1 embeddings, Balanced cuts and their applications, Tree embeddings via random cuts. 
(10 Lectures)   
Random Hyperplanes, Dimensionality Reduction, and Hashing: Solving semidefinite programs, Rounding 
SDPs using random projections: MAX-CUT, Dimensionality reduction via random projections, Approximate 
nearest neighbors, Locality sensitive hashing: Random projections and Min hashing. (10 Lectures)   
Game Theory: Selfish algorithmic strategies, Cost sharing schemes using Primal-Dual algorithms. (2 Lectures)  
  
Text book 

1. V. VAZIRANI (2013), Approximation Algorithms, Springer-Verlag. 
 
Reference Books 
1. M.R. GAREY, D.S. JOHNSON (2016), Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-

Completeness, W. H. Freeman Company. 
2. D. DU, K.KO, X. HU (2011), Design and Analysis of Approximation Algorithms, Springer. 

 
 
  

31 
 



 
Course Title Distributed Algorithms Course No. CS7xxx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech CSE, AIDE Type Bouquet/Elective 
Prerequisite Design and Analysis of Algorithms   
Objectives  
The objective of the course is to introduce the distributed algorithms in real-world systems 
  
Learning Outcomes 
Students will be able to: 
1. To introduce the most important basic results in the area of distributed algorithms, and prepare interested 

students to begin independent research or take a more advanced course in distributed algorithms. 
2. To implement distributed algorithms in real-world distributed computing platforms 
3. To understand and identify applications of distributed algorithms in real-world systems 
 

Contents 
Introduction to Distributed Computing Models : Model of a distributed system: asynchronous message-passing 
model,   Time and message complexity, Safety and liveness properties, Clock Synchronization [5 Lectures ] 
Leader Election Logical Clocks and Causality:  Leader election in rings, Asynchronous leader election with identities, 
Synchronous leader election by abusing the synchronous model, Logical clocks and vector clocks , Snapshots and 
synchronization [ 7 Lectures]  
Message Ordering and Group Communication: Termination Detection Algorithms and Reasoning with 
Knowledge  [4 Lectures] 
Distributed Mutual Exclusion Algorithms: Lamport’s algorithm,  Ricart–Agrawala algorithm, and  Deadlock 
Detection Algorithms [6 Lectures] 
Global Predicate Detection:  Modalities on predicates, Centralized algorithm for relational predicates,  
Conjunctive predicates, Distributed algorithms for conjunctive predicates  [3 Lectures]  
Distributed Shared Memory: Memory consistency models,  Shared memory mutual exclusion and Wait-
freedom  [6 Lectures] 
Checkpointing and Rollback Recovery: Checkpoint-based recovery  and  Log-based rollback recovery [3 
Lectures] 
Consensus and Agreement : Agreement in a failure-free system (synchronous or asynchronous) , Agreement in 
(message-passing) synchronous systems with Failures, Agreement in asynchronous message-passing systems 
with failures ,  Wait-free shared memory consensus in asynchronous systems [6 Lectures] 
Distributed Programming Environments:  Communication primitives, selected case studies  [2 Lectures] 
 
Text book 
A.D. KSHEMKALYANI, M. SINGHAL (2011), Distributed Computing: Principles, Algorithms, and Systems, 
Cambridge University Press. 
 
Reference Books 
1. N. LYNCH, (1996), Distributed Algorithms, Morgan Kaufmann, 1st Edition. 
2. G. TEL, (2000), Introduction to Distributed Algorithms, Cambridge University Press, 2nd Edition. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
 



Title Graph-theoretic Algorithms Number CS7xxx 
Department Computer Science L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Algorithm Design and Analysis   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 

1. Introduce and address graph problems using algorithm design principles. 
1. Discuss graph theoretic algorithms in real-world scenarios. 

 
Learning Outcomes  

1. To give the student further exposure to the design, analysis, and application of algorithms for problems defined 
on graphs. 

2. Formulate and solve real-world problems using the mathematical foundations of graph theory. 
 
Contents  
Introduction to graphs. (2 Lectures) 
Max Flow Min Cut Theorem, Algorithms for min cut and max flow, Maximum matching, Hall’s theorem, 
algorithms for computing maximum matching in weighted and unweighted graphs. (6 Lectures) 
Vertex and Edge Coloring of Graphs, Independent Set. (4 Lectures) 
Interval graphs, Perfect elimination orders, Comparability graphs, Interval Graph Recognition, Friends of 
Interval Graphs. (7 Lectures) 
Trees and treewidth. (7 Lectures) 
Planar Graphs, Problems in planar graphs, Maximum Cut. (8 Lectures) 
Planarity Testing, Triangulated graphs, Friends of planar graphs, Hereditary properties. (8 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks 

1. A. BRANDSTÄDT, V.B. LE, J.P. SPINRAD (1999), Graph Classes: A Survey, SIAM Monographs on Discrete 
Mathematics and Applications, SIAM.  

2. T. NISHIZEKI, N. CHIBA (1988), Planar Graphs: Theory and Algorithms, North-Holland publisher. 
3. M.C. GOLUMBIC (2004), Algorithmic Graph Theory and Perfect Graphs, Academic Press, 2nd Edition.  

 
Self-Learning Material  

1. T. BIEDL, Lecture Notes of a Graduate Course, University of Waterloo. 
 

33 
 



Title Parameterized Complexity Number CS7xxx 
Department Computer Science L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M. Tech.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Algorithm Design and Analysis   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 

2. The objective of the course is to introduce a technique to deal with NP-hard problems 
 
Learning Outcomes  

1. Learn a new set of techniques to cope with NP-hard problems. 
2. Identify novel and significant open research questions in the field. 

 
Contents  
Introduction to Parameterized Complexity. (1 Lecture) 
Basic Techniques to design parameterized algorithms: Bounded Search Tree, Iterative Compression, 
Randomized method. (16 Lectures) 

Kernelization: Greedy Based Kernels, Matching Based Kernels, Sunflower Lemma, Crown Decomposition, 
Expansion Lemma. (16 Lectures) 
Parameterized Intractability. (9 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks 

1. M. CYGAN, F. FOMIN, L. KOWALIK, D. LOKSHTANOV, D. MARX, M. PILIPCZUK, M. PILIPCZUK, S. 
SAURABH (2015), Parameterized Algorithms, Springer. 

2. F. FOMIN, D. LOKSHTANOV, S. SAURABH, M. ZEHAVI (2019), Kernelization: Theory of Parameterized 
Preprocessing, Cambridge University Press.  
 
Self-Learning Material  

1. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ex8TueBsF1g&amp;list=PLhkiT_RYTEU0gpi97fqjtaHy9Gk47oF85&a
mp;index=1 

2. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VAEul4J3Br8&amp;list=PLhkiT_RYTEU1ekkuDwau01N4_Axr_PHQI
&amp;index=1 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 



Core Bouquet - 2 

1. VLSI Design (EE) 3xx 
2. Embedded Systems (EE) 3xx 
3. High-level Synthesis 7xx 

 
 
  

35 
 



Course Title High-level Synthesis Course No. CS/EE-7XX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for M.Tech  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Basic knowledge of digital circuits   
Objectives 

1. To provide an introduction to high-level synthesis of digital circuits and electronic design automation. 
2.  To explain the HLS design flow: circuit, logic, RTL, algorithm, systems. 

 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability in: 

1. Design Digital Circuits, Logic synthesis, optimization and technology mapping. 
2. Design Verification 
3. Use different tools like C-to-Silicon, AutoPilot from AutoESL, Synopsis for logic synthesis, 

 
Contents  
Introduction: Basic overview of the VLSI design flow, design abstractions (2 Lectures) 
Digital Sub-System Design: Logic Circuits, Adders, Multipliers, ALU (5 Lectures) 
HDL language: System C (8 Lectures) 
Synthesis: Scheduling, Allocation, Binding (3 Lectures) 
RTL Synthesis, Retiming, FSM Encoding, Combinational logic optimization and technology 
mapping (6 Lectures) 
Verification: Design vs verification, Types of Verification at each step of ASIC Design Flow 
(functional/power/Gate Level Simulation (GLS)), UVM, Verification planning and Designing a test bench (7 
Lectures) 
Chip Architectures: Full Custom, Standard Cells and FPGA (4 Lectures) 
Synthesis Tool: C-to-Silicon, AutoPilot from AutoESL (4 Lectures) 
Overview of layout synthesis topics: Placement and routing. Chip Synthesis. (3 Lectures) 
 
Reference Books 

1. M. FINGEROFF (2010), High-level Synthesis Blue Book, Xlibris.  
2. G. De MICHELI (2017), Synthesis and Optimization of Digital Circuits, McGraw-Hill. 
3. S. KANG, Y. LEBLEBICI (2003), MOS Digital Integrated Circuits, Analysis and Design, WCB- 

MCGrawHill, 3rd Edition. 
 

 
 
  

36 
 



Theory and Algorithms 

1. Theory of Computation 4xx 
2. Randomized Algorithms 7xx 
3. Approximation Algorithms 7xx 
4. Complexity Theory 4xx 
5. Advanced Data Structures 4xx 
6. Stream Analytics 
7. Quantum Computing (IDRP) 4xx 
8. Optimization (Mathematics) 3xx 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

37 
 



Title Theory of Computation Course No. CSL4xxx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C])   
Offered for B.Tech (CSE) Type Elective 
Prerequisite Mathematics for Computing Antirequisite  
Objectives 

1. To learn about computability techniques 
2. To learn about advanced computational complexity models 

Learning Outcomes 
1. To be able to distinguish between computable and un-computable problems 
2. Gaining in-depth understanding of advanced complexity models 

Contents 
Computability: Review of Turing Machine, NP and NP-completeness, Diaganolization,  view of PDAs, 
2DFAs, FAs as restricted TMs, and related theorems. Tape reduction, and robustness of the model. Encoding 
and Enumeration of Turing Machines, Undecidability. Rice-Myhill-Shapiro theorem. Relativisation. 
Decision Trees and Communication Complexity:  
Certificate Complexity, Randomized Decision Trees, Lower bounds on Randomized Complexity, Some 
techniques for decision tree lower bounds, Comparison trees, and sorting lower bounds, Yao’s MinMax 
Lemma, Definition of communication complexity, Lower bound methods, Overview of other communication 
models, Applications of communication complexity. 
Time Complexity: Time as a resource, Linear Speedup theorem, Crossing sequences and their applications, 
Hierarchy theorems. P vs NP. Time Complexity classes and their relationships. Notion of completeness, 
reductions. Cook-Levin Theorem. Ladner’s theorem. Relativization Barrier: Baker-Gill-Solovoy theorem.  
Space Complexity: Space as a resource. PSPACE, L and NL. Reachability Problem, Completeness results. 
Savitch’s theorem, Inductive Counting to show Immerman-Szelepscenyi theorem. Reachability problems, 
Expander Graphs, SL=L 
Complexity of Counting & Randomization: Counting problems, Theory of #P-completeness. The 
complexity classes PP, ParityP, BPP, RP, BPP is in P/poly, Toda’s theorem.  
 
Textbooks 

1. D. Kozen (2013), Automata and Computability, Springer  
2. D. KOzen (2006), Theory of Computation, Springer  
3. S. Arora and B. Barak (2009), Complexity Theory: A Modern Approach, Cambridge University Press. 

 
Reference books 

1. Sipser, M., (2013), Introduction to the Theory of Computation, Cengage Learning 
2. Hopcroft,J. E., Motwani, R., and Ullman, J. D., (2007), Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages, and Computation, 

Pearson 

Self-Learning Material  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
 



Course Title Complexity Theory Course No. CSL6xxx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech CSE Type Elective 
Prerequisite Maths for Computing, Data Structures and   

Algorithms 
Objectives 

1. The course provides a challenging introduction to some of the central ideas of theoretical computer science. It 
attempts to present a vision of computer science beyond computers. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students are expected to understand: 

1. The theory of classical complexity classes and its challenges. 
2. The state-of-the-art in the field of complexity theory.  

  
Contents   
Basic Complexity Classes: The computational model, NP and NP completeness, Diagonalization, Space 
complexity, The Polynomial hierarchy and alternations, Circuits, Randomized computation, Interactive proofs, 
Complexity of counting, Complexity issues in cryptography. (16 Lectures)   
Lower Bounds for Concrete Computational Models: Decision trees, Communication complexity, Circuit lower 
bounds, Algebraic computation models. (10 Lectures)  
Advanced topics: Average case complexity: Levin’s theory, Derandomization, Expanders and extractors, 
Hardness amplification and Error correcting codes, PCP and hardness of approximation, Logic in complexity 
theory, Quantum computation. (16 Lectures)   

  
Text Books  

1. S. ARORA, B. BARAK (2009), Computational Complexity: A Modern Approach, Cambridge University Press, 
1st Edition. 
  
Self Learning 

1. MIT Lecture Notes, Automata, Computability, and Complexity, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science: 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-045j-automata-computability-
and-complexity-spring-2011/lecture-notes/   

 
 
 
 
 
  

39 
 



Course Title Advanced Data Structures Course No. CS4xxx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech CSE, AIDE Type Elective 
Prerequisite Data Structures and Algorithms   
Objectives  
Data structures are one of the important elements of modern computer science. The objective of the course is to 
learn major results and current research directions in data structure beyond the traditional linear and non-linear 
data structures.  
  
Learning Outcomes  

1. Students will be able to use unconventional and modern data structures for the changing need of new age 
algorithmic problems.  

2. Students will learn to solve problems using data structures.  
  
Contents   
Temporal Data Structures: Persistent and retroactive data structures, Pointer machine. (5 Lectures)  
Geometric Data Structures: Point location, Range searching, Fractional cascading, Data structures for moving 
data. (5 Lectures)  
Dynamic optimality: Analytic bounds, Splay trees, Geometric view, independent rectangle, key-independent 
optimality. (5 Lectures)  
External Memory Data Structures: Cache-oblivious (CO) Data structures such as B-Tree, CO priority Queue 
etc. (5 Lectures)  
Integer Data Structures: Predecessor/Successor problems, van Emde Boas, x-fast and y-fast trees, Fusion trees: 
Sketching, Parallel comparison, Most significant set bit. (6 Lectures)  
Static Trees and String Data Structures: Least common ancestor, Range minimum queries, Level ancestor, 
Suffix tree, Suffix array, Linear-time construction for large alphabets, Suffix tray, Document retrieval. (5 
Lectures)  
Memory Efficient Data Structures: Rank, Select, Tries, Compact suffix arrays and trees. (5 Lectures)  
Dynamic Graphs: Link-cut trees, Heavy-light decomposition, Euler tour trees, Decremental connectivity in 
trees, Fully dynamic connectivity. (6 Lectures)  

   
Reference Books 

1. R.E. TARJAN (1983), Data Structures and Network Algorithms, SIAM. (covers BSTs, splay trees, link-cut trees)  
2. P. MORIN (2013), Open Data Structures, Athabasca University Press, 31st Edition.  (covers BSTs, B-trees, 

hashing, and some integer data structures)  
  
Self Learning Material 

1.  MIT Lectures in Advanced Data Structures (6.851): https://courses.csail.mit.edu/6.851/fall17/lectures/  
 

 
 
 
  

40 
 



Course Title Stream Analytics Course No. CSxxx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech 3rd and 4th years; PG  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Introduction to Machine Learning, Pattern   

Recognition and Machine Learning  
Objectives 

1. Provide background on some of the important models, algorithms, and applications related to stream data.  
 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Ability to understand and apply the practical and algorithmic aspects related to various topics of data streams 
 
Contents  
Introduction:  Stream and mining algorithms. (2 Lectures)  
Clustering Massive Data Streams: Micro-clustering based stream mining, clustering evolving data streams, 
online micro-cluster maintenance, High-dimensional projected stream clustering, Classification of data streams 
using micro-clustering, On-demand stream classification, Applications of micro-clustering. (12 Lectures)  
Classification Methods in Data Streams: Ensemble based classification, Very fast decision trees, On-demand 
classification, Online Information Network. (6 Lectures)  
Distributed Mining of Data Streams: Outlier and anomaly detection, Clustering, Frequent itemset mining, 
Classification, Summarization. (6 Lectures)  
Change Diagnosis Algorithms in Evolving Data Streams: Velocity density method, Clustering for 
characterizing stream evolution. (4 Lectures)  
Multidimensional Analysis of Data Streams using Stream Cubes: Architecture for online analysis of data 
streams, Stream data cube computation, Performance study. (6 Lectures)  
Dimensionality Reduction and Forecasting on Streams: Principal Component Analysis, Auto-regressive 
models and recursive least squares, Tracking correlations and hidden variables. (6 Lectures)  
 
Text Book 

1. C.C. AGGARWAL, (Ed.), Data Stream: Models and Algorithms, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2007. 
 

  

41 
 



Hardware 

1. Embedded Systems (EE) 3xx 
2. VLSI Design (EE) 3xx 
3. High-level Synthesis 4xx 
4. Hardware Software Co-Design 7xx 
5. Neuromorphic Computing and Design 7xx 
  
 
  

42 
 



Title Hardware Software Co-design Number EEL7XX/CS7XX 
Department CSE/Electrical Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Digital Design   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 

1. Give overview of the cooperative design of hardware and software components. 
2. Provide the understanding of unification of currently separate hardware and software paths 

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Achieve system-level objectives by exploiting the synergism of hardware and software through their 
concurrent design. 

2. Understand the movement of functionality between hardware and software. 
                                                                                                       
Contents  
Introduction to Hardware-Software Co-design, Design process, Application domains, Design technologies. (5 
Lectures) 

Data flow modeling implementation in software and hardware, Analysis of control flow and data flow, Finite 
state machine with datapath, Custom hardware, Microprogrammed architecture, system on chip. (12 Lectures) 

Codesign methodologies: Model representation, Hardware-software mapping - partitioning, scheduling, and 
allocation, Software code optimization. (10 Lectures) 

Hardware-software interfaces: Principles of hardware software communication, On-chip buses, Memory-
mapped interface, Coprocessor interface. (10 Lectures) 

Codesign CAD tools: Ptolemy Project. (5 Lectures) 

Textbook  
1. P.R. SCHAUMONT (2010), A Practical Introduction to Hardware/Software Codesign, Springer; 1st Edition. 
2. G. De MICHELI, M. SAMI (1996), Hardware/Software Co-Design, Springer. 

 
  

43 
 



Course Title Neuromorphic Computing and Design Course No. CS7xx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, MTech, PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisite Introduction to Machine Learning / Pattern   

Recognition and Machine Learning 
Objectives 

1. To provide information about neuroscientific progress towards reverse-engineering the brain 
2. To provide essentials on key hardware building blocks, system level VLSI design and practical real-world 

applications of neuromorphic Systems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. View neuromorphic computing as a computer architecture research problem 
2. Perform software and hardware implementation of basic biological neural circuits 

 
Contents  
 
(Fractal 1)  
Foundational Concepts: Introduction to neuromorphic engineering, Neuroanatomy of human brain, Signaling 
and operation of biological neurons, Neuron models - LIF, IF, HH, Synapses and plasticity rules, Spike-time-
dependent plasticity (STDP), Biological neural circuits, Non-von Neumann computing approach, Learning 
rules, Retina, Cochlea. (14 Lectures) 

(Fractal 2)  
Neuromorphic Computing: Spiking Neural Networks (SNN), Advanced nanodevices for neuron 
implementation, Synaptic emulation - Non-volatile memory (NVM), Flash, RRAM, Memristors, CNT, Case 
study on Intel’s Loihi neuromorphic chip. (14 Lectures) 

(Fractal 3)  
Hardware Implementation: Electronic synapses, Digital/Analog neuromorphic VLSI, Hardware 
implementation of neuron circuits, Hardware implementation of synaptic and learning circuits, Synaptic 
programming methodology optimization. (14 Lectures) 
  
Text Books 

1. S. C. LIU (2002), Analog VLSI: Circuits and Principles, MIT Press.  
2. R. KOZMA (2012), Advances in Neuromorphic Memristor Science, Springer.  
3. E. KANDEL (2012), Principles of Neural Science, McGraw Hill. 

 
 
 

44 
 



Systems 

1. Software Testing and Quality Assurance 7xx 
2. Distributed Database Systems 7xx 
3. Distributed Systems 4xx 
4. Mobile and Pervasive Computing 700 
5. Edge and Fog Computing 4xx 
6. Virtualization and Cloud Computing  700 
7. Compiler Design 7xx 
8. Software Maintenance 4xx 
 
 
 
  

45 
 



Course Title Software Testing and Quality Assurance Course No. CS7xxx 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech CSE Type Elective 
Prerequisite Software Engineering   
Objectives  

1. The course provides an introduction to software engineering testing process, describes the quality assurance 
process and its role in software engineering.   
  
Learning Outcomes 

1. The student will be able to work with various testing techniques, methods and tools.  
2. The student will be able  to demonstrate proficiency in managing a industry scale software project to customer 

requirements.  
3. Students will be able to describe the state of the art validation and verification techniques.   

  
Contents   
Overview and Basics: Software quality, Quality assurance and its context, Quality Engineering. (6 Lectures)  
Software Testing: Concepts, Issues, and Techniques, Testing process, Testing levels such as unit, module, 
subsystem, system; Automatic and Manual techniques for generating and validating test data, Static vs dynamic 
analysis, Functional testing, Web application testing, Reliability assessment. (20 Lectures) 
Quality Assurance beyond testing: Defect prevention and Process improvement, Software inspection, Formal 
verification, Fault tolerance and Failure containment, Comparing quality assurance techniques and activities. 
(8 Lectures)  
Quantifiable Quality Improvement: Feedback loop and activities for Quantifiable quality improvement, 
Quality model and measurements, Defect classification and analysis, Risk identification, Reliability 
engineering. (8 Lectures) 

  
Reference Books  

1. J. TIAN (2005), Software Quality Engineering: Testing, Quality Assurance and Quantifiable Improvement, 
Wiley. 

2. P. AMMANN, J. OFFUTT (2016), Introduction to Software Testing, Cambridge University Press, 2nd Edition. 
 

 
 
  

46 
 



Course Title Distributed Database Systems Course No. CS7XX 
Department Computer Science & Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, MTech, PhD Type Elective 
Prerequisites Operating Systems, Database Systems, Computer   

Networks, Data Communication 
Objective 

1. To understand and appreciate concepts of distributed database design, and its associated issues of consistency, 
concurrency, optimization, integrity, reliability, privacy, and security. 

 
 Learning Outcome 

 1. Ability to understand the need for distributed database systems and its related complexities pertaining to 
fragmentation, replication, availability, concurrency, consistency and recovery. 
  
Contents 
Introduction: Distributed data processing concepts, What is a DDBS - advantages, disadvantages and problem 
areas. (2 Lectures) 
Distributed Database Management System Architectures: Transparencies, Architecture, Global directory 
concepts and issues. (3 Lectures) 
Distributed Database Design: Design strategies, Design issues, Fragmentation, Data allocation. (4 Lectures) 
Semantics Data Control: View management, Data security, Semantic integrity control. (5 Lectures) 
Query Processing: Objectives, Characterization of processors, Layers of processing, Query decomposition, Data 
localization. (5 Lectures) 
Query Optimization: Factors, Centralized query optimization, Fragmented query ordering, Query 
optimization algorithms. (5 Lectures) 
Transaction Management: Goals, Properties, Models. (4 Lectures) 
Concurrency Control: Concurrency control in centralized systems, Concurrency control in DDBSs - algorithms, 
Deadlock management. (5 Lectures) 
Reliability: Issues and types of failures, Reliability techniques, Commit protocols, Recovery protocols. (5 
Lectures) 
Other Avenues: Parallel database Systems, Multi-databases. (4 Lectures) 

  
Reference Books 

1. S. CERI, G. PELAGATTI (2008), Distributed Databases: Principles and Systems, McGraw-Hill, 1st Edition (2017 
Reprint). 

2. M.T. ÖZSU, P. VALDURIEZ (2011), Principles of Distributed Database Systems, Springer, 3rd Edition. 
 

 
  

47 
 



Course Title Distributed Systems Course No. CS4XX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 2-0-0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite Operating Systems   
Objectives 

1. To introduce issues, challenges and approaches related to distributed systems 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability in: 

1. Designing, deploying and managing distributed systems   
2. Understanding and analyzing various distributed algorithms and approaches  

 
Contents  
Introduction:  Introduction to advanced operating systems and distributed systems. (2 Lectures) 
Concurrency, Ordering, Races: Implementing Remote Procedure Calls, Time, Clocks, and the Ordering of events 
in a distributed system, Distributed snapshots: Determining global states of distributed systems, Detecting 
concurrency bugs: Eraser & TSVD. (8 Lectures)  
File Systems and Disks: A Fast file System for UNIX, Scale and performance in a distributed file system, The 
Design and implementation of a log-structured file system, A case for redundant arrays of inexpensive disks 
(RAID).  (6 Lectures) 
Fault Tolerance: Implementing fault-tolerant services using the state machine approach, Paxos, Practical 
Byzantine fault tolerance. (6 Lectures) 
OS Kernels and Virtual Machines: Microkernels, System code verification, Kernels for multicore & 
disaggregation, Virtual machines. (6 Lectures) 
 
Text  Books 

1. T. ANDERSON, M.DAHLIN (2014), Operating Systems: Principles and Practice, Recursive Books, 2nd 
Edition. 

2. N. LYNCH (2009), Distributed Algorithms, Elsevier India.  
 
Reference  Books 

1. W.R. STEVENS, S.A.RAGO (2013), Advanced Programming in the Unix Environment, Addison-Wesley, 3rd 
Edition. 

2. W.R. STEVENS, B. FENNER, A.M. RUDOFF (2004), Unix Network Programming: Networking APIs: Sockets 
and XTI (Volume 1), Addison-Wesley, 3rd Edition. 
 
Online References 

1. http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~remzi/Classes/537/Spring2018/ 
2. Https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~15712/syllabus.html 

 
 
  

48 
 



Course Title Mobile and Pervasive Computing Course No. CS7XX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech and M. Tech Type Elective 
Pre-requisites Computer Networks   
Objectives 
1. Explain necessary concepts to understand challenges in developing applications for mobile devices, when 

contrasted with that of a general-purpose computer.  
2. Introduce mechanisms employed by different cellular technologies, particularly 5G, and contrast them with 

each other. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
At the end of this course, students would be able to:  
1. Describe the working principles of various cellular technologies, as well as appreciate the associated 

challenges. 
2. Compare/contrast various aspects of Mobile and Pervasive Computing, viz. localization, sensing, security 

and privacy concerns, application development, etc. 
3. Implement the theoretical concepts into practical scenarios.. 
 
Contents  
Overview of Wireless Systems: Infrastructure-based vs Ad-hoc, Wireless LANs, Cellular systems, Sensor 
networks, Bluetooth, WiFi, WiMAX. (3 Lectures) 
Medium Access: Link Adaptation, Routing Protocols. (4 Lectures) 
Mobility and Handoff Management: Link layer mobility mechanisms (location management protocols), 
Network layer mobility mechanisms (Macro and Micro mobility protocols), Handoff management protocols. (6 
Lectures) 
Cellular Networks: LTE and 5G overview,  5G Architecture, RAN and dynamic CRAN, Mobility management 
and Network slicing in 5G. (11 Lectures) 
Pervasive Computing: Principles, Characteristics, Pervasive devices, Smart sensors and actuators, Context 
communication and access services. (4 lectures) 
Context Aware Sensor Networks: Open protocols (SDP, Jini, SLP, UPnP), SyncML framework, Context aware 
mobile services, Context aware security. (4 lectures) 
Energy Efficiency, Localization (GPS/WiFi/GSM), Security (4 Lectures) 
Recent Advances in Wearable devices (3 Lectures) 
Body Area Networks (BAN) (3 Lectures) 
 
Textbooks 
1. I. STOJMENOVIC (2002), Handbook of Wireless Networks and Mobile and Pervasive Computing, Wiley. 
2. S. LOKE (2006), Context-aware Pervasive Systems: Architectures for a New Breed of Applications, CRC 

Press.  
3. A. OSSEIRAN, J.F. MONSERRAT, P. MARSCH, (Eds.), 5G Mobile and Wireless Communications 

Technology, Cambridge University Press, 2016. 
Reference Books 
1. R. KAMAL (2008), Mobile and Pervasive Computing, Oxford University Press, 3rd Edition. 
2. L. MERK, M. NICLOUS (2006), Principles of Mobile and Pervasive Computing, Dreamtech Press, 2nd 

Edition. 
3. G. AGGELOU (2004), Mobile Ad hoc Networks: From Wireless LANs to 4G Networks, McGraw-Hill 

Professional. 
Self-learning Material: 
1. J.J. DRAKE, Z. LANIER, C. MULLINER, P.O. FORA, S.A. RIDLEY, G. WICHERSKI (2014), Android 

Hacker's Handbook, John Wiley, 1st Edition. 
2. P. SINGH, NPTEL, IIIT Delhi:  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106147/ 
3. Relevant research papers from MobiSys, Sensys, MC2R, MobiCom and UbiComp. 

 
 
 

49 
 



Course Title Edge and Fog Computing Course No. CS4xx 
Department Computer Science & Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite Operating Systems, Computer Networks   
Objectives 

1. This course will introduce design concepts, frameworks, and applications in Edge Computing to the audience 
 
Learning Outcomes: 
1. To understand various edge devices and their ecosystems, issues and challenges 
2. To develop edge-based distributed computing platforms and applications 
 
Contents  
Introduction of Edge and Fog Computing: Internet of Things (IoT) and New computing paradigms, Fog 
computing: A platform for Internet of Things and analytics, Emergence of edge computing, Legal aspects of 
operating IoT applications in the fog. (6 Lectures) 
Edge Architecture: Multi-Tier cloud computing framework; Data services with clouds at home; Leveraging 
mobile devices to provide cloud service at the edge; Fast, scalable and secure onloading of edge functions. (8 
Lectures) 
Networking for Edge & Fog: Integrating IoT + Fog + Cloud Infrastructures: System modeling and research 
Challenges, Management and Orchestration of network slices in 5G, Fog, Edge, and Clouds. (6 Lectures) 
System Design: Optimization problems in fog and edge computing, Middleware for fog and edge Computing: 
Design issues, A Lightweight container middleware for edge cloud architectures. (8 Lectures) 
Data Processing: Data management in fog computing, Predictive analysis to support fog application 
deployment, Using machine learning for protecting the security and privacy of Internet of Things (IoT) systems, 
fog Computing realization for Big data analytics. (8 Lectures) 
Applications and Case Studies: Fog computing realization for Big data analytics, exploiting fog computing in 
health monitoring, Smart surveillance video stream processing at the edge for real‐time human objects tracking, 
Fog computing model for evolving smart transportation applications. (6 Lectures) 
 
Text Book 

1. R. BUYYA, S.N. SRIRAMA (2019), Fog and Edge Computing: Principles and Paradigms, Wiley-Blackwell, 
2019. 
 

  

50 
 



Course Title Virtualization and Cloud Computing Course No. CS7xx 
Department Computer Science & Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite Operating Systems, Computer Networks   
Objectives 

1. This course will introduce fundamentals of virtualization and concepts, frameworks, and applications in Cloud 
Computing to the audience 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. To understand various virtualization techniques and their features and limitations 
2. To understand design and concepts of a cloud computing framework 
 
Contents  
Cloud Computing: Concept, Definition, Cloud Types and Service Deployment Models. (5 Lectures) 
Virtualization: Concept, Definition, Types of Virtualization, Hardware Virtualization, Full and Para 
Virtualization, Hypervisors, Hardware-assisted virtualization, operating system level virtualization, 
application virtualization  (10 Lectures) 
Virtual and Physical Networking: Introduction, vSwitches, virtual NICs, Virtual Networking, virtual LAN (5 
Lectures) 
Storage Virtualization: Introduction, SAN/NAS versus storage virtualization. (4 Lectures) 
Virtual Machine Management: Base Virtual Machine, Virtual CPUs, Sockets, Cores, Memory Scaling Up and 
Scaling Down, USB Support, Virtual Disks, Live Migration. Security. (10 Lectures) 
Containers: Concept, Definition, Docker, Container versus Virtualization, Portability, Remote deployment (5 
Lectures) 
Applications and Case Studies: Linux KVM, VirtualBox, Openstack. (3 Lectures) 
 
Text Book 
1. D.E. SARNA (2010), Implementing and Developing Cloud Computing Applications, CRC Press. 
2. B.S. SODHI (2017), Topics in Virtualization and Cloud Computing, Ropar PB India, 2017. 
 
Reference Book 

1. B. FURHT, A. ESCALANTE (2010), Handbook of Cloud Computing (Vol. 3), Springer. 
 

 
 
  

51 
 



Course Title Compiler Design Course No. CSL7xx0 

Department CSE Structure (L-T-P- 3-0-0-0 [3] 
D[C]) 

Offered for B.Tech., M.Tech. Ph.D. Type Elective 
Prerequisite    

Objectives 
1. To introduce key challenges for modern compilers and runtime systems  
2. To explain various optimization techniques of a typical compilation workflow. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. To learn about compilation techniques for obtaining high performance on modern computer 

architectures. 
2. To analyze and optimize various components of compilation stages 

Contents  
Representing Programs: Abstract Syntax Tree, Control Flow Graph, Dataflow Graph, Static Single Assignment, 
Control Dependence Graph, Program Dependence Graph, Call Graph. (11 Lectures) 
Analysis/Transformation Algorithms: Dataflow Analysis, Interprocedural analysis, Pointer analysis,  Rule-
based analyses and transformations. Constraint-based analysis. (12 Lectures) 
Applications: Scalar optimizations, Loop optimizations, Object-oriented optimizations, Register allocation, 
Program verification, Bug finding. (8 Lectures) 
Advanced Topics: Just-in-time compilation, Memory Management, EDGE architecture compilation, Power-
aware compilation, Machine specific optimizations (11 lectures). 

Text Books 
1. K.D. COOPER, L.TORCZON (2011), Engineering a Compiler, Morgan Kaufmann, 2nd Edition. 
2. S. MUCHNICK (1998), Advanced Compiler Design Implementation, Morgan Kaufmann. 

Reference Books 
1. Y.N. SRIKANT, P.SHANKAR (Eds.) (2007), The Compiler Design Handbook: Optimizations and Machine 

Code Generation, CRC Press, 2nd Edition. 
2. A.V. AHO, M.S. LAM, R. SETHI, J.D. ULLMAN (2007), Compilers: Principles, Techniques and Tools, 

Addison-Wesley, 2nd Edition. 
3. R. ALLEN, K. KENNEDY (2001), Optimizing Compilers for Modern Architectures: A Dependence Based 

Approach, Morgan Kaufmann, 1st Edition. 
4. M. WOLFE (1995), High-Performance Compilers for Parallel Computing, Addison-Wesley. 
5. IEEE and ACM Digital Library. 

Self Learning Material 
1. NPTEL Lecture: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106/108/106108052/ 

 
  

52 
 



Course Title Software Maintenance Course No. CS4xx 
Department Computer Science & Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite Software Engineering   
 
Objectives 
1. To explain theories, models, tools, and processes for the maintenance and evolution of large software systems 

and cloud applications 
2. To familiarize with practices, techniques and processes that can help team build high quality software 

Learning Outcomes 
1. Understand the difficulties of developing code in a change context as opposed to new development 
2. Identify the principal issues associated with software evolution and explain their impact on the software 

lifecycle 
3. Describe techniques, coding idioms and other mechanisms for implementing designs that are more 

maintainable 

Contents  
Introduction: Basic concepts, difference between new development and maintenance, categorizing software 
change and limitations, maintenance frameworks (4 lectures) 
Understanding Software & Evolution: Program comprehension models: top-down, bottom-up, opportunistic; 
Variants of software maintenance, relations to software engineering life-cycle, techniques of software evolution 
and testing, quantitative analyses, empirical analyses, qualitative analyses of software, evolution dynamics (10 
Lectures) 
Software Maintenance: Maintenance processes: quick-fix model, boehm's model, osborne’s model, iterative 
enhancement model, process maturity, Search-based Software Testing, Summarization Techniques for Code, 
Changes, and Testing, Change impact analysis (7 Lectures) 
Software Reuse: Reverse engineering levels & techniques:  forward, restructuring, refactoring, reengineering, 
software reuse and evolution, the laws of software evolution, reuse techniques and design for reuse, libraries 
vs. application frameworks - Software product lines (7 Lectures) 
 
Laboratory  
Assignments/Projects on program comprehension and reverse engineering: program slicer, static analyser, 
dynamic analyzer, dataflow analyser, cross-reference, dependency analyser, transformation tools; Testing tools: 
simulators, test case generator, test path generators; source code, control system. 
 
Text Books 
1. Grubb, P., & Takang, A. A. (2003). Software maintenance: concepts and practice. World Scientific. 
2. Galin, D. (2018). Software quality: concepts and practice. John Wiley & Sons.. 

Reference Book 
Pigoski, T. M. (1996). Practical software maintenance: best practices for managing your  
software investment. Wiley Publishing. 
 
Online Courses 
Reverse Engineering Essentials: Udemy, https://www.udemy.com/course/reverse-engineering-essentials/ 

 

 
 

53 
 



Network and Security 

1. Introduction to wireless ad hoc network  7xx 
2. 5G Mobile Networks 7xx 
3. Cryptography and Network Security 4xx  
4. Software Defined Networks (CS/EE) 7xx 
5. Introduction to Blockchain 7xx 
6. Intelligent Radio Networks (EE) 7xx 
7. Data Communication Networks (EE) 3xx 
8. Cognitive Internet of Vehicles (EE) 7xx 
9. Delay Tolerant Networks (EE) 7xx 
 
 
 
  

54 
 



Course Title Introduction to Wireless Ad hoc Network Course No. CS7XX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech, MTech, PhD Type Elective 
Pre-requisites Computer Networks   
Objectives 

1. The course is intended to provide students with an understanding of the wide applicability of Wireless Ad-Hoc 
networks and their associated design issues and challenges.  

2. It also sheds light on protocol design, mainly at the MAC layer. 
 
Learning Outcomes 

1. At the end of this course, students would be able to appreciate the mechanisms and interventions required at 
different levels to make Wireless Ad-hoc networks work in practice. 

2. They would be able to explain different MAC protocols and their issues. 
3. Students would also be able to contrast transport layer design issues arising out of mobility, with the conventional 

TCP. 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Wireless Ad-hoc Networks: Overview about Mobile ad-hoc networks (MANETs), Vehicular Ad-
hoc networks (VANETs), Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) and Wireless Mesh Networks (WMNs). (2 Lectures) 
Physical layer: Modulation techniques, Channel models, Case-study of 802.11a PHY. (3 Lectures) 
Link Layer: Single-hop MAC protocols, multi-hop MAC protocols, Error correcting codes. (5 Lectures) 
Network Layer: Mobile IP, Distributed wireless routing algorithms (AODV, DSDV, DSR, OLSR), Routing metrics. 
(8 Lectures) 
Transport Layer: TCP over wireless, Transport level mobility management, Multihop transport protocols.  (6 
Lectures) 
Introduction to 5G networks (3 Lectures) 
Low Power Wide Area Networks (LPWAN) for IoT: LoraWAN, NB-IoT, SigFox. (9 Lectures) 
Personal Area Networks: Bluetooth. (3 Lectures) 
Future trends in wireless networks: 802.11ax, 802.11ay, mm-Wave WiFi. (3 Lectures) 
 
Note 
Please note that the course material would not be taken from a single book or resource. It would be a combination 
of textbook material, research papers and other sources. 
 
Textbooks 

1. W. STALLINGS (2009), Wireless Communications & Networks, Pearson Education India, 2nd Edition. 
2. T.S. RAPPAPORT (2010), Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice, Prentice Hall, 2nd Edition. 

 
Reference Books 

1. C.S.R. MURTHY, B.S. MANOJ (2004), Ad hoc Wireless Networks: Architectures and Protocols, Pearson.  
2. G. AGGELOU (2004), Mobile ad hoc networks: from wireless LANs to 4G networks, McGraw-Hill Professional. 
3. S. BASAGNI, M. CONTI, S. GIORDANO, I. STOJMENOVIC, (Eds.), Mobile Ad hoc Networking, John Wiley, 

2004.  
4. A. GOLDSMITH (2005), Wireless Communications, Cambridge university press. 
5. Recent relevant RFCs, Internet drafts, selected research papers from relevant venues: Mobicom, MobiSys, 

SIGCOMM, Infocom, IEEE TMC, ACM MC2R. 
 
Self-learning Material 

1. S. MISHRA NPTEL, IIT Kharagpur: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105160/ 
2. Relevant research papers. 

 
 
 
 
 

55 
 



Course Title 5G Mobile Networks Course No. CS7XX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P-C) 3-0-0 
Offered for B.Tech Type Core 
Pre-requisites Computer Networks, Ad-hoc Wireless   

Networks 
Objectives 
The course is intended to provide students with an understanding of the forthcoming 5G technology, and its 
ability to transform the world for the better. 
 
Learning Outcomes 

1. Students would be able to appreciate the increasing role that SDNs play in 5G systems and beyond. 
 
Contents  
4G LTE networks: Introduction, overview and architecture. (4 Lectures) 
From 4G to 5G : Why, When and How? (1 Lecture) 
5G overview: Understanding 5GPP & NGMN, 5G architecture and design objective, 5G spectrum requirements, 
SDN in the 5G context. (6 Lectures) 
5G Core: 5G RAN & Dynamic CRAN, Virtual Network Functions in the 5G core, 5G NR Logical  
Architecture, 5G Protocol Stack. (13 Lectures) 
5G signalling: Millimeter wave propagation, Distributed massive MIMO principle, 5G Ultra dense cellular 
networks, 5G Coordinated Multi-Point. (8 Lectures) 
5G Mobile Edge computing & Fog computing (2 Lectures) 
5G applications: Healthcare, Transportation, Smart cities, AR, VR. (2 Lectures) 
5G vs mm-wave Wifi: A comparison. (2 Lectures) 
India’s 5G policy and vision (1 Lecture) 
The 6G vision (1 Lecture) 
Paper discussions (2 Lectures) 
 
Note 
Please note that the course material would not be based on a single book or resource. It would be a combination 
of textbook material, research papers and other sources from the Internet. 
 
Textbooks 

1. A. OSSEIRAN, J.F. MONSERRAT, P. MARSCH (Eds.) (2016), 5G Mobile and Wireless Communications 
Technology, Cambridge University Press. 
 
Reference Books 

1. A. ELNASHAR, M.A. EL-SAIDNY, M. SHERIF (2014), Design, Deployment and Performance of 4G-LTE 
Networks: A Practical Approach, John Wiley & Sons. 
 
Self-learning Material 

1. Relevant research papers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

56 
 



Title Cryptography and Network Security Course No.  CS 4XXX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering  Structure (L-T-P 3–0–0 [3] 

[C]) 
Offered for B.Tech  Type Elective 
Prerequisite Maths for Computing and Computer   

Networks 
Objectives 

1. The course deals with the underlying principles of Network security. It develops the mathematical tools 
required to understand cryptography. 

2. Provide fundamental understanding of the concepts related to information theoretic security, cryptographic 
techniques and protocols. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 

1. Design encryption techniques for information and network security. 
2. Evaluate the security of communication systems, networks and protocols based on a multitude of security 

metrics. 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Information Security: Schematic of secure communication systems, simple cryptosystems, 
Cryptanalysis – attack models, attacks on different ciphers. (3 Lectures)  
Shannon’s Approach to Cryptography: Perfect secrecy, entropy, One-time pad. (2 Lectures) 
Symmetric Key Cryptography: Data Encryption Standard (DES) and differential cryptanalysis, The Advanced 
Encryption Standard (AES). (5 Lectures) 
Cryptographic Hash Functions: Definition of hash functions and properties, Unkeyed hash functions, Keyed 
hash functions, Message Authentication Codes (MAC), The Random Oracle Model (ROM). (4 Lectures) 
Authentication: A simple authentication protocol and possible attacks, Strong password protocols, BM 
Encrypted Key Exchange (EKE), Key Distribution Centers (KDC), Certification authorities and certificate 
revocation, KDC based authentication protocols. (6 Lectures) 
Public Key Cryptosystems: RSA public key cryptosystem, The ElGamal public key cryptosystem and discrete 
logs.  (4 Lectures) 
Digital Signatures: The Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA), Key distribution and Key agreement protocols, 
Key pre-distribution, Diffie-Hellman key exchange. (8 Lectures) 
Protocols: TCP/IP threats, The IPSEC protocol, The SSL and TLS protocols, Firewalls and Virtual Private 
Networks (VPNs), Electronic mail security, Worms, DDoS attacks, BGB and security considerations. (10 
Lectures) 
 
Text Book 

1. W. STALLINGS (2018), Network Security Essentials: Applications and Standards, Pearson, 6th Edition. 
 
Reference Books 

1. D. BONEH, V. SHOUP (2017), A Graduate Course in Applied Cryptography (Version 0.4). 
2. M.B. PATERSON, D.R. STINSON (2018), Cryptography: Theory and Practice, CRC Press, 4th Edition. 
3. C. KAUFMAN, R. PERLMAN (2016), Network Security: Private Communication in a Public World, Pearson, 

2nd Edition.  

 
Self-Learning Material  

1. Network security, NPTEL Course Material Department of Computer Science and Engineering,  IIT Kharagpur: 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105031/     
 
 
  

57 
 



Title Introduction to Blockchain Course No. CSL 7XX 
Departmen Computer Science and Engineering Structure (L-T-P [C]) 3–0–0 [3] 
t 
Offered for B.Tech, MTech, PhD.  Type Elective 
Prerequisite  Cryptography andNetwork Security   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 

1. Explain how blockchain technology works 
2. Integrate blockchain technology into the current business processes to make them secure 

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Understand what and why of Blockchain 
2. Explore major components of Blockchain and Identify a use case for a Blockchain application 
3. Create their own Blockchain network application 

 
Contents  
Introduction to Blockchain: Digital Trust, Asset, Transactions, Distributed Ledger Technology, Types of 
network, Components of blockchain (cryptography, ledgers, consensus, smart contracts). (5 Lectures) 
PKI and Cryptography: Private keys, Public keys, Hashing, Digital Signature. (6 Lectures) 
Consensus:  Byzantine Fault, Proof of Work, Proof of Stake. (6 Lectures) 
Cryptocurrency: Bitcoin creation and economy, Limited Supply and Deflation, Hacks, Ethereum concept and 
Ethereum classic. (10 Lectures) 
Hyperledger Fabric: Hyperledger Architecture, Membership, Blockchain, Transaction, Chaincode, Hyperledger 
Fabric, Features of Hyperledger, Fabric Demo. (8 Lectures) 
Blockchain Applications: Building on the Blockchain, Ethereum Interaction - Smart Contract and Token 
(Fungible, non-fungible), Languages, Blockchain-as-a-service. (6 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  

1. A. BAHGA, V. MADISETTI (2017), Blockchain Applications: A Hands-On Approach, VPT. 
 
Self Learning Material  

1. M. SWAN (2015), Blockchain: Blueprint for a New Economy, O’Reilly Media. 
2. R. WATTENHOFER (2016), The Science of the Blockchain, CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform. 
3. I. BASHIR (2017), Mastering blockchain, Packt Publishing Ltd. 
4. K.E. LEVY, Book-smart, Not Street-smart: Blockchain-based Smart Contracts and the Social Workings of Law, 

Engaging Science, Technology, and Society, vol. 3, pp. 1-15, 2017.     
 
Preparatory Course Material  

1. MIT Online Blockchain Course, Learn Blockchain Technology: https://getsmarter.mit.edu/   
 
  

58 
 



Course Title Software Defined Networks Course No. CS7XXX 
Department Computer Science and Engineering/Electrical Structure (L-T-P-C) 2-0-0 

Engineering 
Offered for B.Tech Type Elective 
Pre-requisites Computer Networks   
Objectives 
The course is intended to provide students with an understanding of the basics of SDNs. 
 
Learning Outcomes 

1. The course would enable students to look forward to SDN applications such as in datacenters and 5G systems. 
 
Contents  
Networking basics: Switching, Addressing, Routing (2 lecture) 
Switching Architecture: Data, control and management planes, hardware lookup, forwarding rules, dynamic 
forwarding tables, autonomous switches and routers (4 lectures) 
SDN Architectures: Plane Separation, Simple Device and Centralized Control, Network Automation and 
Virtualization, Openness SDN Controllers, SDN Applications, Northbound and Southbound APIs (5 lectures) 
OpenFlow: Switch-Controller Interaction, Flow Table, Packet Matching, Actions and Packet Forwarding, 
Extensions and Limitations (3 lectures) 
Network Function Virtualization: SDN vs. NFV, OPNFV, Inline Network Functions, Service Creation and 
Chaining, NFV Orchestration (5 lectures) 
Emerging SDN Models: Protocol Models, Controller Models, Application Models, SDN in Datacenters: 
Multitenancy, Failure Recovery, SDN in Internet eXchange Points (IXPs) (4 lectures) 
Data Center Networking in the context of SDN (5 lectures) 
 
Note 
Please note that the course material would not be based on a single book or resource. It would be a combination 
of textbook material, research papers and other sources from the Internet. 
 
Textbooks 

1. P. GORANSSON, C. BLACK, T. CULVER (2016), Software Defined Networks: A Comprehensive Approach. 
Morgan Kaufmann. 

2. K. GRAY, T.D. NADEAU (2016), Network Function Virtualization, Morgan Kaufmann. 
 
Self-learning Material 

1. Relevant research papers. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

59 
 



Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning  

1. Artificial Intelligence (AIDE)  
2. Deep Learning (AIDE)  
3. Dependable Artificial Intelligence (AIDE) 
4. Resource-Constrained AI (AIDE)  
5. Advanced Machine Learning (AIDE) 
6. Advanced Artificial Intelligence (AIDE) 
7. Information Retrieval (AIDE) 
8. Social Networks (AIDE)  
9. Soft Computing Techniques (AIDE) 
10. Autonomous Systems (IDRP) 
11. Ethics, Policy, Law and Regulation in AI (AIDE) 
12. Planning and Decision making for Robots (IDRP) (700) 

 
 

60 
 



Speech, Text and Vision 

1. Digital Image Processing (AIDE) 
2. Computer Graphics (AIDE)    
3. Video Processing (AIDE) 
4. Computer Vision (AIDE)  
5. Introduction to AR and VR (AIDE) 
6. Advanced Biometrics (AIDE) 
7. Data Visualization (AIDE) 
8. Natural Language Understanding (AIDE) 
9. Speech Understanding (EE) 
10. Principles of Biological Vision and Applications 7xx 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

61 
 



Title Principles of Biological Vision and Number CS7XXX 
Applications  

Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech., M.Tech., Ph.D.  Type Elective  
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
The instructor will provide: 

1. An account of various biological perception and cognitive processes. 
2. Computational models for such processes 
3. Examples of machine vision applications with such computational models. 

 
Learning Outcomes  
On completion of the course, the students are expected to have the ability to: 

1. Appreciate the principles of biological perception and cognition. 
2. Apply computational models for perception and cognition processes of biological vision in various machine 

vision tasks.  
 
Contents  
(Fractal 1 (14 Lectures)) 
Introduction: Perception, reasoning and cognition; roles of knowledge, memory and learning. (2 Lectures) 
Eye and early vision:  Lateral Inhibition; convolution; detection of oriented edges; color, texture and motion 
perceptions; peripheral vision. (4 Lectures) 
Reasoning systems: Deductive, abductive and inductive reasoning; statistical property of nature; Bayesian 
framework of reasoning; Bayesian networks; parameter estimation; on complexity of models and prior 
probabilities; information integration; hierarchical Bayesian models and inductive generalization. (8 Lectures) 
(Fractal 2 (14 lectures)) 
Late Vision: Depth perception; perceptual grouping; foreground-background separation; multi-stability; 
models for object recognition; hierarchical models; visual quality and aesthetics. (5 Lectures) 
Visual attention: cognitive, information-theoretic, Bayesian, context based and object-based attention models; 
evaluation of attention models. (6 Lectures) 
Introduction to cognitive architectures: Active vision; perceive-interpret-act cycles; modeling cognition 
processes; roles of short-term and long-term memory; review of STAR architecture. (3 Lectures) 
(Fractal 3 (14 lectures)) 
Knowledge Representation and learning: Role of knowledge in visual interpretation; memory, knowledge and 
learning; short-term and long-term memory; structured and unstructured knowledge; semantic networks; 
frame-based representation; symbol grounding problem; perceptual knowledge; unified framework for 
conceptual and perceptual knowledge; learning in knowledge-based systems. (5 Lectures) 
Neural networks for vision: Introduction to neural network; CNN for image classification and object detection; 
knowledge representation in neural networks; RNN and life-long learning; LSTM; recurrent attention models; 
reinforcement learning, meta-learning and multi-task learning; knowledge-infused learning; graph networks. 
(6 Lectures) 
Applications in machine vision tasks: Computational photography; digital heritage; social robots; smart 
content delivery and re-purposing. (3 Lectures) 
 
Textbook  

1. H. GHOSH (In Press – expected Jun/Jul 2020), Computational Models for Cognitive Vision,, Wiley-IEEE Press. 
Reference Material  
Research literature to be announced in class. 

 

62 
 



Social and Sustainable Computing 

1. Social Computing (3-0-0) 
2. Sustainable Computing (3-0-0) 
3. ICT for Development (2-0-0) 
4. Machine Learning in Epidemiology (3-0-0) 
5. Health Informatics (3-0-0) 
6. Computational Social Choice Theory (3-0-0) 
7. Computational Cognition and Behavior Modelling (3-0-0) 
8. Crowd-sourcing and human-computing (3-0-0) 
9. Environmental Informatics (3-0-0) 
10. Computational Microeconomics (3-0-0) 

  

63 
 



Title Social Computing Number CS L7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech (All) Type Elective 
Prerequisite Data Structure and Algorithms   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the fundamental and current challenges in social computing.  
2. Explain how to design social computing systems to be effective and responsible.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Explore social computing systems, get experience with social data analyses and focus on design, and 

evaluation of a social software as their final project for the course. 
2. Engage in the creation of new computationally-mediated social environments.     
 
Contents 
Introduction and overview Social Software:  Introduction, Different types of social software like blogging, 
microblogging, Q&A, Forum, Wiki etc. [3 Lectures] 
Social information processing  :  Tagging, Social Navigation, Social Search, Social Bots  [4 Lectures] 
Group collaboration:  Wikis and Wikipedia, Computer supported collaboration tools, Content sharing, Open 
source software development  [6 Lectures] 
Recommender systems :  Content based, collaborative filtering, challenges of social information processing [5 
Lectures] 
Social data analysis :  Visualization, Sense-making, APIs, Facebook, Wikipedia, Twitter  [6 Lectures] 
Social capital : Definitions and measures, Social capital and social networks, Role of online communities on 
social capital [6 Lectures] 
Challenges of online communities: Dealing with newcomers, under-contribution problem Encouraging 
contributions to online communities, Strategies supported by social science theories  [8 Lectures] 
Social computing, cities, and society: Impact on physical and psychological well-being, Connection to real world, 
Equality of participation [4 Lectures] 
 
Text Book 

1. Becker, Howard S. Writing for social scientists: How to start and finish your thesis, book, or article. 
University of Chicago Press, 2008. 
 
Reference Books 
1. Bail et al (2018). Exposure to opposing views on social media can increase political polarization. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(37), 9216-9221. 
2. Dubois, E., & Blank, G. (2018). The echo chamber is overstated: the moderating effect of political interest 

and diverse media. Information, Communication & Society, 21(5), 729-745. 
3. Salganik, M. J., & Watts, D. J. (2009). Web-based experiments for the study of collective social dynamics in 

cultural markets. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1(3), 439-468. 
 
Self-Learning Material  

1. Social Computing, IIT Kharagpur, http://cse.iitkgp.ac.in/~pawang/courses/SC16.html 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

64 
 



Title Sustainable Computing Number CS L7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech (All) Type Elective 
Prerequisite PRML / Introduction to Machine Learning   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 

1. Describe ways to leverage networking, sensing, and computational strategies to help address sustainability 
issues related to biodiversity, climate, environment, urban design, transportation, buildings and others. 

2. Draw from professional experiences to ground all topics and discussions in “real world” examples. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 

1.  Gain an understanding of how data and computation can be used to identify root causes of sustainability 
challenges, create targeted strategies to address them, engage stakeholders, and track and communicate 
progress. 

2.  Develop skills to design metrics and solutions for evaluation of progress towards sustainability goals. 
3.  Comprehend the power and shortcomings of data in communicating complex sustainability issues. 

 
Contents 

Introduction, SDG goals, & Sustainability metrics: Humanity and the environment, Sustainability, 
Dimensions of sustainable design, Sustainability metrics. [3 Lectures] 

Climate: Computational techniques for weather predictions & models of climate variance. [5 Lectures] 

Biosphere: Species distribution modelling; Aggregate phenomena modelling; Ecosystem modelling; Animal 
identification; Case study: Green Security games, Bird Returns program. [6 Lectures] 

Health, Food & Water: Health/medical informatics & Telemedicine; Poverty mapping, Food & Farm 
optimization; Modelling for water distribution. [6 Lectures] 

Insuring impact with technology for Education & Gender equality. [3 Lectures] 

Usability & HCI for assistive technologies. [3 Lectures] 

Green technology & E-waste.  [2 Lectures] 

Sustainable energy systems: Energy-constrained scheduling, Electricity demand & renewable resource 
prediction, Models for energy consumption, Smart grid. [4 Lectures] 

IT energy efficiency: Measure energy efficiency of computer system components in sync with solution 
frameworks; Energy consumption estimation of whole systems; Energy efficiency metrics; Sustainable 
resource management techniques for cloud computing, edge/fog computing, high-performance computing, 
wearable computing, Internet-of-Things (IoT), and cyber-physical systems; Sustainable data centers. [10 
Lectures] 
 
Text Books 

1. Theis, T., & Tomkin, J. (2015). Sustainability: A Comprehensive Foundation. OpenStax CNX. 
2. Issa, T., & Isaias, P. (2015). Sustainable Design: HCI, Usability and Environmental Concerns. Springer-Verlag 

London. 
3. Green & Sustainable Computing - Part I & II. Elsevier. 

 
 
 
Reference Material 
1. Gomes, C. et al. (2019). Computational Sustainability: Computing for a Better World and a Sustainable 

Future. Communications of the ACM, 62(9),56-65. 
2. Sustainability Metrics Reading List: https://afddf8e8-2dfc-4526-9ba6-

71e1899413f3.filesusr.com/ugd/571f98_b203aa22d378452b986dbc667acb13b7.pdf. 
3. Reading List: http://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs6702/2011sp/. 
4. Reading List: https://www.coursera.org/learn/sustainability#syllabus 
 

 

65 
 



Title ICT for Development Number CS L4XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 2-0-0 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech (All) Type Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Facilitate an interactive platform for students to discuss and learn ICT strategies for various problems. 
2. Reflect upon his/her own experiences in deploying ICT solutions in social settings and the associated 

challenges.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Appreciate the potential that ICT possesses to make an impact on the society. 
2. Learn through various case studies, that different problem settings require different solution approaches. 
 
Contents 
From the origins of ICTD to Big data and development [3 lectures] 
Development theory and the critiques of ICTD [4 lectures] 
Localization techniques and Identity management [3 lectures] 
ICTD: knowledge economies and development [3 lectures] 
e-learning and development [2 lectures] 
e-governance and development [2 lectures] 
ICTs and Environment sustainability [2 lectures] 
Building sustainable rural information service networks [2 lectures] 
Sustainability failures of rural telecentres [1 lecture] 
ICT for Agriculture [2 lecture] 
ICTD: Information sharing practices [1 lecture] 
ICTD for community networks and disaster management [2 lectures] 
ICT4D: the future [1 lecture] 
 
Text books 
1. Heeks, R. (2017). Information and communication technology for development (ICT4D). Routledge. 
2. References 
3. https://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/study/course/ICT_Development_Reading_List.pdf 
4. http://act4d.iitd.ernet.in/act4d/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=33&Itemid=42 
5. https://www.kth.se/student/kurser/kurs/kursplan/IV1009-20082.pdf?lang=en 
6. https://www.manchester.ac.uk/study/masters/courses/list/06237/msc-icts-for-development/course-

details/MGDI60701#course-unit-details 
7. Self-Learning Material 

 
  

66 
 



Title Machine Learning in Epidemiology Number CS L7XX0 

Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech (All) Type Elective 

Prerequisite Introduction to  Machine Learning/ PRML   

Objectives 
Course focuses on advances in machine learning and its application to causal inference and prediction via 
Targeted Learning, which allows the use of machine learning algorithms for prediction and estimating so-
called causal parameters, such as average treatment effects, optimal treatment regimes, etc.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
On completion of the course the students will have: 
1. Ability to apply machine learning algorithms to prediction problems and estimate and derive inference 

for the resulting fit. 
2. Ability to use the fits of machine learning algorithms to estimate causal effects using simple substitution 

estimators. 
3. Knowledge of How the general methodology applies to goals of Precision Medicine. 
 
Contents 

Introduction: Introduction to epidemiology, statistical methodologies in epidemiologic studies, curse of 
dimensionality in epidemiology, Relation between ML and epidemiology, more on epidemiology. [4 Lectures] 

Prediction of Observational Epidemiology: Clinical Decision Support, Disease Surveillance, Introduction to 
Targeted Machine Learning. [4 Lectures] 

Causal Inference: Understanding bias, Correlation vs. causalty,  Causal graph inference. [4 Lectures] 

Super-Learning: Parametric Models, Data Adaptivity, Performance Measure on Independent Data, 
Customizable Optimality criterion, Sequential super learning. [8 Lectures] 

Target Update of Machine Learning: TMLE, HAL, HAL-TMLE,  C-TMLE, TMLE with Clustering, On-line 
super learning, On-line targeted learning for time series. [14 Lectures]  

Case Studies in Epidemiology: Ebola, Corona etc. [4 Lectures] 

Future Directions: Deep learning in clinical epidemiology, Recurrent unit neural networks to identify 
individuals at risk. [4 Lectures] 
 
Reference Books 
1. Van der Laan & Rose (2018), Targeted Learning in Data Science Causal Inference for Complex 

Longitudinal Studies, Springer 
2. Van der Laan & Rose (2011), Targeted Learning in Causal Inference for Observational and Experimental 

Data, Springer 

  
Reference Articles 
1. Timothy L. Wiemken, Robert R. Kelley (2020), Machine Learning in Epidemiology and Health Outcomes 

Research, Annual Review of Public Health, 41(1), 21-36 
2. Goldstein, N. D., LeVasseur, M., & McClure, L. A. (2020). On the Convergence of Epidemiology, 

Biostatistics, and Data Science. Harvard Data Science Review.  
3. Char DS, Shah NH, Magnus D. (2018), Implementing machine learning in health care- Addressing ethical 

challenges, New England Journal of Medicine; 378-981 (3). 
4. Chiavegatto Filho ADP, Dos Santos HG, do Nascimento CF, Massa K, Kawachi I. (2018), Overachieving 

municipalities in public health: A machine learning approach, Epidemiology; 29-836-40. 
https://medium.com/causal-data-science/causal-data-science-721ed63a4027 

5. Other relevant articles 
 

 
 

67 
 



Title Health Informatics  Number CS L7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech (All) Type Elective 
Prerequisite Data Structure and Algorithms   
Objectives 
1. Develop knowledge about problems and challenges that health informatics addresses 
2. To develop an understanding of different types of data exchange formats and standards techniques for 

different purposes. 
3. To equip the students with various possible applications of the digital data  analysis in healthcare.   
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Apply basic knowledge to the research and practice of health informatics 
2. Demonstrate basic skills and knowledge in health informatics for application in future health-related 

careers 
3. Utilize the tools and techniques for collecting, storing, securing, retrieving, and reporting health care data 

and information  
 
Contents  
Introduction: Overview, health data, information, and knowledge, electronic health records, system 
architecture for EHRs, ambulatory EHR functions and interoperability, personal health records and decision 
aids. [6 lectures]  
Health Care Information Systems: Healthcare data standards - Overview, methods, protocols, terminologies, 
and specifications for the collection, exchange, storage, and retrieval of information associated with health care 
applications. [6 lectures] 
Data Collection and Quality Assurance: Data collection, cleaning data, managing change, Using Data for Care 
Delivery, Coordination, and Quality Improvement, Quality assurance, Security, Privacy. [8 lectures] 
Clinical Data: Introduction, medical digital data formats and exchange, medical image formats such as 
DICOM in the context of health informatics. [4 lectures]  
Informatics: Information retrieval, bioinformatics - usage of informatics in genomics and other aspects of 
molecular biology, patient case history analytics, applications in public health, ethical issue in health 
informatics. [8 lectures] 
Medical Diagnostic Decision Support: probabilistic approaches, clinical scores, logical approaches - expert 
system, inference engines, case studies. [6 Lectures] 
Digital healthcare: Telemedicine, mobile for health, public health [4 lectures]  
 
Text Books 
1. Hoyt, R. E., & Yoshihashi, A. K. (2014). Health informatics: practical guide for healthcare and information 

technology professionals. Lulu. com 
2. Hersh, W. R., & Hoyt, R. E. (2018). Health Informatics: Practical Guide Seventh Edition. Lulu. com 
 
Reference Material 
1. Landais, P., Boudemaghe, T., Suehs, C., Dedet, G., Lebihan-Benjamin, C., Venot, A., ... & Quantin, C. 

(2014). Medical Informatics, e-Health: Fundamentals and Applications. 
2. Healthcare data standards, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK216088/ 
3. Data Collection and Quality Assurance, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK208601/ 
4. Computer-aided diagnosis medical image analysis techniques, 

https://www.intechopen.com/books/breast-imaging/computer-aided-diagnosis-medical-image-
analysis-techniques 

 
Self-Learning Material  

1. Health Informatics Specialization, Coursera Online, https://www.coursera.org/specializations/health-
informatics  

 

68 
 



Title Computational Social Choice Theory Number CS L7XX0 

Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech (All) Type Elective 
Prerequisite Design and Analysis of Algorithms   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Familiarize with mechanisms for collective decision making 
2. Focus on interface of social choice theory with theoretical computer science 
3. Enable students to conduct research in this fast-growing field 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Understand the problems and research directions in computational social choice. 
2. Mathematically formulate the problems that arise in society, and design efficient rules for these problems. 
3. Analyse computational complexity of problems in social choice. 
 
Contents 

Introduction to Voting Theory: social choice functions, voting rules and their axiomatic study. [5 Lectures] 

Computational hardness and Algorithms for voting rules: Condorcet, minimax, Dodgson’s rule, and Kemeny.  
[5 lectures] 

Manipulation in Voting: various means of manipulation: strategic voting, bribery, control, computational 
hardness and algorithms. [7 lectures] 

Multiwinner Election: voting rules and their computational complexity. [4 lectures] 

Matching under preferences: introduction to  stable matching, Gale-Shapley algorithm, hospital/resident 
problem, stable roommate problem. [8 lectures] 

Manipulation in Matching: means of manipulations, computational hardness and algorithms. [3 lectures]  

Introduction to Fair Allocation: basic terminologies, fairness and efficiency criteria. [4 lectures] 

Fair Allocation of  goods: fair allocation of indivisible and divisible goods. [6 lectures] 
 
Text Book 
1. Brandt, F., Conitzer, V., Endriss, U., Lang, J., & Procaccia, A.D. (2016). Handbook of Computational Social 

Choice. Cambridge University Press. 
2. Gusfield, D., & Irving, R.W. (1989). The Stable Marriage Problem: Structure and Algorithms. MIT press 
3. Manlove, D. (2013). Algorithmics Of Matching Under Preferences. World Scientific 
4. Reference Books 
5. Endriss, U. (2017). Trends in Computational Social Choice. Lulu. com 
6. Lecture Notes on Fair Division by U. Endriss 

 
  

69 
 



Title Computational Cognition & Behavior Modelling  Number CS L4XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech (All) Type Elective 
Prerequisite Probability & Statistics, PRML   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Draw on formal models from classic and contemporary artificial intelligence to explore fundamental issues 

in human cognition and behavior. 
2. Encourage students to explore answers to questions on cognition and behavior (e.g., What are the different 

forms that our knowledge of the world takes? How does this lead to behaviour?) and ways to model them 
3. Help students develop an understanding of how computational modeling can advance cognitive science, 

how cognitive science can contribute to research in machine learning and AI, and how to fit and evaluate 
cognitive models to understand behavioral data. 

 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Demonstrate knowledge of basic concepts and methodologies of cognitive and behavioral modelling - be 

able to design simple models for sample problems. 
2. Demonstrate understanding of the relationship between computational models and psychological 

theories - critically assess the psychological adequacy of a given model. 
3. Qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate computational models of cognition and behavior. 
4. Extend the understanding of these models to the design of architectures for social cognitive agents for 

applications such as autonomous driving, and assistive robotics. 
 
Contents  
Fractal 1 [Computational Modelling Techniques for Cognition and Behavior] 
Introduction [1 Lecture]: The motivation underlying the computational modelling of cognition, and the possible 
questions that can be answered 

Probabilistic approaches to modelling cognition & behavior [4 lectures]: Bayesian inference, hierarchical Bayesian 
models, probabilistic graphical models  

Inductive Logic Programming & Language of thought models. [3 Lectures] 

Deep learning, reinforcement learning for modelling cognition. [3 Lectures] 

Information sampling & Active learning. [3 Lectures] 

Fractal 2 [Cognition Modelling] 
The mind as an information-processing system - Marr's levels of analysis (computational, algorithmic, 
implementation) [1 Lecture] 

Structure and formation of intuitive theories of cognition of physical, biological and social systems; Learning 
causal relations. [3 Lectures] 

Symbolic (rule-based), subsymbolic (probabilistic) & connectionist (network-based) models of cognition [3 
Lectures] 

Methodology and issues in the development and evaluation of cognitive models [7 Lectures]: Which psychological data 
are relevant? How do we collect such data (e.g., EEG, Eye-tracker; across ages & genders)? What predictions 
can be made by the models of cognition? How can these predictions be tested? - Some possible example models: 
language processing, memory, reasoning, categorization. 

Fractal 3 [Behavioral Modelling] 
Introduction [4 Lectures]: Brain & behavior; Understanding social behavior; General motivation underlying 
computational modelling of behavior 

Symbolic (rule-based), subsymbolic (probabilistic) & connectionist (network-based) approaches to behavior 
modelling [3 Lectures] 

Methodology and issues in the development and evaluation of behavioral models [7 Lectures]: Which behavioral data 
are relevant? How do we collect such data (e.g., EEG, Eye-tracker; across ages, genders & societies)? What 
predictions can be made? How do these predictions apply to assistive system design? 

 

70 
 



Text Books 
1. Russell, S. J., & Norvig, P. (2020).  Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. 4th Edition. Prentice Hall. 
2. Farrell, S., & Lewandowsky, S. (2018). Computational Modeling of Cognition and Behavior. Cambridge 

University Press. 
 

Reference Material 
1. Issa, T., & Isaias, P. (2015). Sustainable Design: HCI, Usability and Environmental Concerns. Springer-

Verlag London. 
2. McClelland, J. L., & Rogers, T. T. (2003). The parallel distributed processing approach to semantic 

cognition. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4(4), 310-322. 
3. Peterson, J., Abbott, J., & Griffiths, T. (2016). Adapting deep network features to capture psychological 

representations. Presented at the 38th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. 
4. Tenenbaum, J. B., Kemp, C., Griffiths, T. L., & Goodman, N. D. (2011). How to grow a mind: Statistics, 

structure, and abstraction. Science, 331(6022), 1279-1285. 
5. Griffiths, T.L., Lieder, F., & Goodman, N.D. (2015). Rational use of cognitive resources: Levels of analysis 

between the computational and the algorithmic. Topics in Cognitive Science, 7(2), 217-229. 
6. Wilson, R.C. and Collins, A.G.E. (2019). Ten simple rules for the computational modeling of behavioral 

data. eLife 2019, 8:e49547. 
7. Goodman, N. D., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Gerstenberg, T. (2014). Concepts in a probabilistic language of 

thought. Center for Brains, Minds and Machines (CBMM). 
 

 
  

71 
 



Title Crowd-sourcing and human-computing  Number CS L7XX0 

Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech (All) Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite Social Computing, Data Structures & Algorithms   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. familiarize with the techniques to manage the crowd  
2. focus on building intelligent systems that involve a combination of computers and humans collaborating 

seamlessly over the Internet 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Program the crowd 
2. Apply usability principles for designing crowd tasks that elicit high-quality responses 
3. Use statistical methods to improve the quality of the work received 
4. Build systems that interface with crowd labor in real time 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Crowdsourcing and Human Computation:  introduction, history, connections to social 
computing, collective intelligence, and management science [4 lectures] 
Human Computation Algorithms: design patterns, case study, discussion [4 lectures] 
Usability Engineering for CrowdSourcing: input-agreement mechanisms, output-agreement mechanisms [4 
lectures]  
Gold Standards: consensus algorithms, incentive mechanisms, gamification [6 lectures] 
Real-time crowdsourcing: queuing theory for predicting worker availability, ensemble learning, crowd agents 
[6 lectures] 
Crowdsourcing Subjective Tasks: social Q&A,  expertise in crowdsourcing, local crowdsourcing / 
community sourcing, crowd funding, citizen science [6 lectures] 
Task Routing: push and pull approaches [4 lectures] 
Crowds & Applications: Crowds: mechanical turk, social media; Applications: computer vision, NLP [8 
lectures] 
 
Text Book 

1.  Law, E., & Ahn,  Ahn, L. (2012). Human Computation: An Integrated Approach to Learning from the 
Crowd, Morgan & Claypool Publishers. 

2.  
Reference Books 
1. Ghosh, A., Lease, M., (2016). Human Computation and Crowdsourcing. Proceedings of the Fourth AAAI 

Conference 
2. Lease M., Alonso O. (2018) Crowdsourcing and Human Computation: Introduction. In: Alhajj R., Rokne J. 

(eds) Encyclopedia of Social Network Analysis and Mining. Springer, New York. 
 
Self-Learning Material  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

72 
 



Title Environmental Informatics Number CS L7XX0 
Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech (All) Type Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce techniques for environmental modeling, environmental databases and information systems. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to:  
1. Apply the techniques for environment modeling on typical applications of environment monitoring and 
protection.  
2. Appreciate the multidisciplinary nature of environmental problems.  
 
Contents  
Introduction to Environmental Informatics: environmental objects, characterisation of an environmental 
system, environmental metadata. [2 lectures]  
Data capture and data storage: introduction, object taxonomies, mapping the environment, advanced 
techniques. [3 lectures] 
Environmental sampling: sampling design, essentials for sampling of environmental data, satellite imagery [4 
lectures] 
Hydrological Modeling: Rainfall-Runoff models, Precipitation Models, Climate Models. [4 lectures] 
Geographical information systems [4 lectures] 
Environmental data analysis: Scales of operation of environmental data, re-sampling of environmental data, 
approximation of environmental data, trend estimation of environmental data [7 lectures] 
Environmental statistics: probability distributions of environmental data, statistical measures, statistical tests, 
regression and correlation [6 lectures] 
Environmental time series: fourier analysis, stationary processes, time correlation functions, frequency 
functions [7 lectures] 
Environmental simulation models: modelling procedure, types and classification of mathematical models, 
process identification, an eutrophication simulator. [5 lectures] 
 
Text Book  
1. Günther, O., (1989). Environmental Information Systems. Springer, Berlin. 
2. Box, G. E. P., Jenkins, G. M. & Reinsel, G. C., (1994). Time Series Analysis. 5th ed., Prentice Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs. 

Reference Books 
Avouris, N. M. and Page, B.  (eds.), (1995). Environmental Informatics – Methodology and Applications of 
Environmental Information Processing. Kluwer, Dordrecht. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

73 
 



Title Computational Microeconomics Number CS L7XX0 

Department Computer Science and Engineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B.Tech (All Branches) Type Program Elective 
Prerequisite Design and Analysis of Algorithms   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Familiarize with the market design 
2. Focus on algorithms to clear the market 
3. Familiarize with the algorithmic game theory 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Design market 
2. Use computer science knowledge to solve economic problems  
 
Contents 
Introduction to Market Design: introduction to various types of auctions, bidding languages, matching 
market, voting. [6 lectures] 

Auction: Myerson’s Lemma, Knapsack auction, revenue-maximising auction, exchanges. [8 lectures] 

Matching Market: Kidney exchange, stable matching, various notions of optimal matching. [8 lectures] 

Noncooperative Game Theory: self-interested agents, price of anarchy, non-atomic and atomic models of 
selfish routing. [5 lectures] 

Games in Normal Form: pareto optimality,  nash equilibria, various solution concepts and their computation. 
[10 lectures]  

Games in Extensive Form: backwards induction, subgame perfect equilibrium, imperfect information, 
equilibrium refinements, computing equilibria. [5 lectures] 

 
Text Book 

1. Shoham, Y. & Brown, K.L., (2008), Multiagent systems: Algorithmic, game-theoretic, and logical foundations, 
Cambridge University Press. 
  
Reference Books 

1. Roughgarden, T. (2016), Twenty lectures on algorithmic game theory, Cambridge University Press. 
 
Self Learning Material 

1. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TM_QFmQU_VA 
 

74 
 



1. Introduction 

Every life form, beginning from microscopic bacteria to multicellular organisms, can be considered as a system 
that has been perfected over millennia by Evolution. Beginning from thermodynamically efficient cellular 
processes to the molecular motors driving the bacterial flagella, each product of evolution is an optimized 
engineering design that can be translated into real-life applications across disciplines. Today’s interdisciplinary 
biology is well complemented by engineering domains including electronics, computer science, mechanics, and 
materials engineering.  Computational biology, for example, permits solving biology problems using statistical, 
artificial intelligence and machine learning approaches. Extensive use of computational biology is essential in 
data-driven approaches including Genomics, Proteomics, Transcriptomics, and Metabolomics. This 
amalgamation of biology and computer science has transformed the landscape of the infectious and non-
infectious diseases research allowing the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic modalities. Today’s 
disease diagnosis is much more specific and sensitive, thanks to biosensors, which have far-reaching 
applications not only in healthcare but also in the environment, energy, and agriculture. Some applications 
include in-situ biosensors for human biochemical parameters, environmental contaminants, soil moisture, soil 
physicochemical parameters, etc. Advances in Biology have not only permitted the early diagnosis of disease 
but have also contributed abundantly to therapeutic interventions. It is now possible to intervene in diseases 
taking a multi-pronged approach, including the development of new drugs; production of recombinant 
therapeutics; development of implantable sensors, control systems; and editing genetic defects. Similarly, 
synthetic biology and genome editing tools have enabled the development of industrially important organisms 
for biofuel production as well as environmental remediation. Together, these technologies have significantly 
contributed to extending the healthy lifespan of the human race and have shown promise towards food, water, 
and energy security. In other words, bioengineering as a discipline has evolved to a great extent in last couple 
of decades and now demands a different intellectual outlook and scientific understanding for its further study.  
Therefore, an undergraduate academic program in Bioengineering should reflect this rapid evolution of the 
discipline, underlying scientific and technological advancements and interdisciplinary cross talk so as to capture 
the mind of the next generation. 
 
The Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur is committed to achieving excellence in shaping the young minds 
of tomorrow with a unique blend of teaching techniques and hands-on research-based learning. The Institute 
works towards the holistic development of students allowing them to be able to assume leadership positions in 
Industry, Academia, and Entrepreneurial ventures. The Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering is 
committed to this goal and has developed academic programs that are interdisciplinary in nature and include 
a substantial component of courses from other science and engineering Departments. The Department aspires 
to produce Graduates, who can develop solutions to tackle local and global problems related to healthcare, 
energy, environment, water, and food. 
 
2. Objectives of the program 

The B. Tech. program in Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur aims to equip our graduates with in-depth knowledge 
and hands-on training in areas that will be relevant for the next decade. The curriculum aims to impart 
knowledge and skills to budding engineers to address future challenges. This includes innovative pedagogy 
and highly interdisciplinary approach towards problem-solving.  
 
The key objectives of this program are: 
1. To provide a strong foundational understanding of concepts in biology, engineering, mathematics, and allied 

sciences, enabling students to approach bioengineering problems through interdisciplinary lenses. 
2. To stimulate the development of disruptive technologies and futuristic research in the domains of healthcare, 

energy, and the environment 
 
3. Expected Graduate Attributes 
 
1. Graduates of the B. Tech program in Bioengineering will: 
2. be able to choose, design, develop, and implement engineering solutions to solve technical problems in 

bioscience and bioengineering using trans-disciplinary knowledge and skill set. 
3. be able to think out-of- the box to solve critical challenges and be able to innovate novel technologies for 

affordable healthcare, clean energy, sustainable agriculture, and safe environment.  

1 
 



4. be able to work effectively as a member and leader in a multi-disciplinary team. 
5. have the requisite skills and knowledge to be bio-entrepreneurs. 
6. be able to effectively communicate biological/ bioengineering problems and solutions within the 

professional sphere and with the society at large. 
7. be committed to high ethical standards in professional and social practices. 
 
4. Learning Outcomes 

1. Graduates of the B. Tech program in Bioengineering: 
2. Will have comprehensive understanding of the essential concepts of bioscience and bioengineering 

encompassing cell and molecular biology, physiology, immunology, microbiology, genetics, genetic 
engineering, multi-omics, computational and systems biology. 

3. Will gain trans-disciplinary knowledge and skill sets pertaining to biosensors, bioimaging, biomedical device 
development, biomaterials engineering and drug discovery.  

4. Will be able to design, develop and implement technological solutions related to affordable healthcare, clean 
energy, sustainable agriculture and safe environment adopting a trans-disciplinary approach. 

5. Will gain a strong understanding of the fundamentals of basic science, engineering, designing, computing 
and will get hands-on training on cutting edge technologies.  

6. Will be able to apply the knowledge of artificial intelligence and machine learning in solving complex 
biological problems.  

7. Will learn to think critically to solve complex problems pertaining to bioscience and bioengineering. 
8. Will develop communication skills (verbal and written) to communicate effectively in the professional and 

social sphere.  
9. Will be committed to high ethical standards.  
10. Will gain the knowledge and skills required to be an innovator-entrepreneur. 
 
5. New skillsets targeted 

Ability to: 
1. Design and develop AI-based technologies in healthcare, environment, and agriculture. 
2. Analyze spatial complexity of living systems using imaging and image processing. 
3. Analyze and solve complex problems in the diverse fields of bioscience and bioengineering using omics 

and systems biology.  
4. Integrate multidisciplinary technologies for the development of lab-on-chip devices, biosensors, and other 

smart devices.  
5. Integrate omics data to quantitative structure-activity relationship for drug discovery and development  
6. Design and develop smart biomaterials using micro- and nano-scale technologies  
7. Design novel strategies for tissue engineering application 
8. Design new therapeutic molecule in silico. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 



6. Topic clouds and Mapping of Topic clouds with proposed courses 
 
Table 1 Topics and Mapping of Topic with Courses 

Area Topics Category (Core/ Course (IE/IS/PC/PE) 
Techniques 

Technology/Systems) 
Omics • Cells and organelles Core and Techniques Concepts & Dynamics: 

• Replication Molecular Cell Biology 
• Transcription and translation (PC 4th) 

• Cell cycle Pre/Co-Req: 

 Biochemistry (PC 3rd) 

• DNA, RNA, Proteins, Core and Techniques  Biochemistry 
metabolites  (PC 3rd) 
• Metabolic pathways  Pre/Co-Req: None 
• Biochemical analysis  
• Enzymes 
• Inheritance Core, Techniques and Genetics & Gene 
• Polymerase chain reaction  Systems Manipulation (PC 5th) 
• Gene therapy Pre/Co-Req: None 

• Genomics  Core and Techniques Introductory Omics  
• Transcriptomics (PC 6th) 
• Proteomics Pre/Co-Req: Concepts 

• Metabolomics & Dynamics: 

• Mass Spectroscopy  Molecular Cell Biology 
(PC 4th

 ) 

• Microbial communities Core and Techniques Microbiomes and 
• Metagenome library Metagenomics (PE) 
• Metagenome sequencing Pre/Co-Req: 

Microbiology (PC 3rd) 
• Biological networks and Systems Computational 
pathways methods for multi-
• Data modeling  omics (PE) 
• Multi-omics integration Pre/Co-
 Req:Introductory 

Omics  (PC 6th) 
• Omics analysis algorithms  Core, Techniques and Microarray data 
• DNA microarray Systems analysis (PE) 
• Data normalization Pre/Co-Req: None 

• Data visualization 
 
 Systems Deep Learning  (PC 
• Neural network 6th) 
• Deep learning models (From CS) 
• Deep generative  models Pre/Co-Req: 

• Representation learning Introduction to 

 machine Learning (PC 
3rd) 

Biomaterials  • Biocompatibility and Core, Techniques and Biomaterials 
Engineering Biodegradability Systems Engineering (PC 6th) 

• Biomaterial characterization Pre/Co-Req: None 
• Implants  
 
• Cell adhesion on substrate Core and Techniques Cell-material 
• Biofilm formation Interactions (PE) 
• Surface modification 

3 
 



Pre/Co-Req: 
Biomaterials 
Engineering (PC 6th) 

• Tissue repair and regeneration Core, Techniques and Tissue Engineering 
• Scaffolds Systems (PE) 
• Animal cell culture Pre/Co-Req: 
 Biomaterials 
 Engineering (PC 6th);  

Cell-Material 
Interactions (PE) 

• Sustained, on-demand and Core, Techniques and Therapeutic delivery 
targeted delivery Systems systems (PE) 
• Drug loading and drug release Pre/Co-Req: 
• Pharmacokinetics and Biomaterials 
pharmacodynamics Engineering (PC 6th) 
 
• Human locomotion Core Principles of 
• Tissue mechanics Biomechanics (PE) 
• Viscoelasticity (From ME) 
 Pre/Co-Req: 

Biomaterials 
Engineering (PC 6th) 

 • 3D printing Techniques and Additive 
• Field deposition model (FDM) Systems manufacturing (PE) 
• Selective laser sintering (From ME) 

• Stereo lithography Pre/Co-Req: 
Biomaterials 
Engineering (PC 6th) 

 • Bio-transport Core and Systems Bio-transport 
• Hemodynamics phenomena (PE) 
• Momentum conservation (From BSBE, CHE, 

• Bio-rheology ME) 
Pre/Co-Req: None 

Computational • Bioinformatics Core and Techniques Computational and 
& Systems • Bio computation System Biology (PC 
Biology  • Mathematical modelling 5th) 
  Pre/Co-Req: Concepts 

& Dynamics: 
Molecular Cell Biology 
(PC 4th) 

• Numerical Methods for PDE Core and Techniques Mathematical Biology 
• Ordinary Differential (PE) (From MA) 
Equations  Pre/Co-Req: 

Computational 
Biology (PC 5th) 

• Methods and method Core, Techniques and Algorithms in biology  
development in computational Systems (PE) 
biology Pre/Co-Req: None  
  
• Biosystems Core and Techniques   Modelling biological 
• Boundary conditions systems (PE) 
 Pre/Co-Req: None 
• Experiment design Core Design of experiments 
• validation (PE)(From MA) 

Pre/Co-Req: None 
 

4 
 



Bioimaging • Optical microscopy Core, Techniques and Bioimaging (PC 6th) 
• Fluorescence microscopy Systems (From CS/EE) 
• Digital imaging Pre/Co-Req: None 

• Medical imaging 
 

• Fourier transform theory Techniques and Digital Image 
• Filtering Systems processing (PE) (From 
• Image enhancement CS/EE) 

Pre/Co-Req: 
Bioimaging (PC 6th) 
 

• Image reconstruction Techniques and Bio-image computing 
• Image restoration Systems (PE) (From CS) 
• Deep learning Pre/Co-Req: 

• 2D, 3D registration Bioimaging (PC 6th) 
 

• Electron scattering and Techniques and Electron microscopy 
diffraction Systems for biology (PE)  
• Scanning and transmission  (From CY) 
• Immuno and cryo-electron Pre/Co-Req: 
microscopy Bioimaging (PC 6th) 

Biosensors • Impedimetric, voltammetric, Core, Techniques and Biosensors (PC 5th) 
amperometric, electrical, optical Systems (From EE) 
sensors Pre/Co-Req: 
• Selectivity and sensitivity Biochemistry (PC 3rd) 

• Genetic circuits for Techniques and Whole cell based 
biosensors Systems biosensors (PE) 
• RNA based sensors Pre/Co-Req: 
• Reporter genes Biosensors (PC 5th) 

• Lithography Techniques and Microsystems 
• Micromachining Systems Fabrication 
• MEMS Technology (PE)(From 
 EE) 

Pre/Co-Req: None 
• Aptamer sensor Techniques and Chemosensors (PE) 
• Cation-selective sensor Systems (From CY) 
• Dendrimer based sensor Pre/Co-Req: 

Biosensors (PC 5th) 
Microbial • Microbial phylogeny Core and Systems Microbiology (PC 3rd) 
systems for • Metabolism   
sustainable • Microbial growth 
development • Applied microbiology 

• Wastewater treatment Systems Microbial remediation 
• Bio-geo chemical cycling and Environmental 
• Solid waste management Biotechnology (PE) 
• In situ and ex situ Pre/Co-Req: 
bioremediation Microbiology (PC 3rd) 

 
 

• Probiotic, symbiotic, plant – Systems Microbes in food and 
microbe interaction sustainable agriculture 
• Fortified food (PE) 
• Nutritional supplements Pre/Co-Req: 
• Single cell protein Microbiology (PC 3rd) 

5 
 



 
 

• Solid , liquid, gaseous Systems Bioenergy (PE) 
biofuels Pre/Co-Req: 
• Engineering microbes for Microbiology (PC 3rd) 
biofuel production  
• Different generations of  
biofuels and sustainability analysis  

Drug design • Protein-protein interaction Core and Techniques Biophysics and 
and • Protein crystallography Structural Biology (PC 
Development • Protein folding 6th) 

Pre/Co-Req: 
Biochemistry (PC 3rd) 

• Drug targets Core, Techniques and Principles of Drug 
• Computer-aided drug Systems discovery  (PE) 
design Pre/Co-Req: 
• Virtual screening Biophysics and 
 Structural Biology (PC 
 5th) 

Biochemistry (PC 3rd) 
• Pharmacophore Core and Techniques Medicinal chemistry 
• Drug metabolism (PE) (CY) 
• Chiral drug molecule Pre/Co-Req: None 

• Antibiotics and antiviral 
 
• Virus life cycle Core, Techniques and Viral infection and 
• Viral immunity Systems antiviral drug 
• Antiviral drugs development (PE) 
 Pre/Co-Req: None 
  
 

Fundamental • Innate immunity Core and Techniques The Human Immune 
courses • Inflammatory response System: Mechanisms 
 • Cell signaling to Detect, Defend and 

• Attack (PC 4th
B- and T-cell lymphocytes ) 

• Clinical immunology Pre/Co-Req: None 

• Membrane transportation Core The Human Machine 
• Muscle mechanics for Engineers: 
• Membrane potential Quantitative 

Physiology (PC 5th
• Cardiovascular, pulmonary, ) 
renal physiology Pre/Co-Req: None 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 



7. Course Categories, credit distribution and Credit Structure of B. Tech Programmes 
 
Table 2 Proposed Course Categories and credit distribution in the proposed B. Tech Programmes 
S.N.  Course Type Course Category  Regular Double B.Tech.  

B.Tech.  
Credit  Tota Credit  Total 

l 
1 Institute Core (I) Engineering (IE) 34 69 34 59 

 Science (IS) 16 16 
Humanities (IH) 12 9 

2 Programme Linked (L) Science (LS) 7 0 
3 Programme Core (P) Programme Compulsory (PC) 50  71 50 71 

Programme Electives (PE) 18 18 
B.Tech. Project (PP) 3 3 

4 Open (O) Open Electives (OE) 10 10 0 0 
5 Engineering Science Engineering Science Core (EC) 0 0 22 22 

(E) Engineering Science Elective (EE) 0 0 8 8 
Total Graded 150  160 

6 Non-Graded (N) Humanities (NH) 6 15 6 15 
Engineering (NE) 3 3 
Design/Practical Experience (ND)  6 6 

Total Graded + Non-Graded   165  175 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 



  8. Credit Structure of B. Tech Programmes 
 
   Table 4 Credit Structure for B. Tech Programmes (Up 6000 Level) 

Type L-T-P Distribution of contact and beyond contact hours Total 
Contact Hours Beyond Contact Total Hours Credits  

(CH) Hours (BCH) (TH) (TC=TH/3) 
1 hour of Lecture 1-0-0 1 hr 2 hr 3 hr 1 
1 hour of Tutorial 0-1-0 1 hr 2 hr 3hr 1  
1 hour of Lab/Project 0-0-1 1 hr 0.5 hr 1.5 hr 0.5 

#Contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 



  9. List of Programme Compulsory Courses 
 
  Table 5 Programme Compulsory Courses  

S. No Course Name Semester L-T-P Contact Credit 
Hours 

1  Biochemistry  III 3-0-0 3 3 
2 Microbiology III 3-0-2 5 4 
3 Data Structures and Algorithms IV 3-0-2 5 4 
4 Concepts and Dynamics: Molecular Cell IV 2-0-2 4 3 

Biology 
5 The Human Immune System: Mechanisms IV 3-0-0 3 3 

to detect, defend and Attack 
6 Biochemistry Laboratory IV 0-0-2 2 1 
7 Computational and Systems Biology V 3-0-2 5 4 
8 The Human Machine for Engineers: V 3-0-0 3 3 

Quantitative Physiology  
9 Biophysics and Structural Biology VI 3-0-1 4 3.5 
10 Genetics and Gene manipulation V 3-0-2 5 4 
11 Biosensors  V 3-0-2 5 4 
12 Bioimaging VI 3-0-0 3 3 
13 Introductory Omics VI 3-0-0 3 3 
14 Biomaterials Engineering VI 3-0-0 3 3 
15 Deep Learning VI 3-0-3 6 4.5 

Total 50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 



 10. Area-wise Programme Elective Courses 
 
 Table 6 Stream-wise Programme Electives Courses  

S. No. Stream Courses L-T-P Credit 

1 Omics - Microbiomes and metagenomics (level 4) 3-0-0 3 
- Computational methods for multi-omics (level 3-0-2 4 
4) 3-0-0 3 
- Microarray data analysis (level 4)    

2 Biomaterials - Cell-material interactions (level 4) 3-0-0 3 
Engineering - Tissue engineering (level 4) 3-0-0 3 

- Therapeutic delivery systems (level 4) 3-0-0 3 

- Principles of biomechanics (level 4; from ME) 3-0-0 3 

- Additive manufacturing (level 7; from ME) 3-0-0 3 

- 3-0-0 3 
Bio-transport phenomena 

3 Computationa - Mathematical biology (level 4; from MA) 3-0-0 3 
l and Systems - Algorithms in biology (level 4)   3-0-0 3 
Biology - Modelling of biological systems (level 4) 2-0-2 3 

- Design of experiments (level 4; from MA) 3-0-0 3 
 

4 Bioimaging - Electron microscopy for biology (level 4/6; from 3-0-0 3 
CY) 3-0-0 3 
- Special topics on biomedical imaging (level 4) 3-0-0 3 
- Digital Image processing (level 4; from CS) 
- Bio-image computing (level 7; CS) 

5 Biosensors - Whole cell based biosensors (level 4) 3-0-0 3 
- Special topics in biosensors (level 4) 3-0-0 3 
- Microsystems fabrication technology (level 7; 3-0-0 3 
from EE) 3-0-0 3 

- Chemosensors (level 6; from CY)  

6 Microbial - Microbial remediation and environmental 3-0-0 3 
systems for biotechnology (level 4)    
sustainable - Microbes in food and sustainable agriculture 3-0-0 3 
development (level 4) 3-0-0 3 

- Bioenergy (level 4)  

7 Drug design - Principles of drug discovery (level 4) 3-0-0 3 
and - Medicinal chemistry (level 4) 3-0-0 3 
development - Viral infection and antiviral drug development 3-0-0 3 

(level 4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 



11. Specialization to be offered by the department 
 
Table 7 Specialization and courses 

S. Name of Specialization Core (8 credits) Specialization Elective (12 Credits) 
No. Specialization 

1 Therapeutic • Modern approaches of drug • Principles of drug discovery (3-0-
engineering and designing (3-0-0) 0) 
drug discovery • Introduction to Precision Medicine • Medicinal chemistry (3-0-0) 

(3-0-0) • Viral infection and antiviral drug 
• AI based drug discovery (2-0-0) development (3-0-0) 
 • Anti-microbial drug and drug 
 resistance (2-0-0) 

• Anticancer drug discovery and 
development (3-0-0) 

• Modern approaches for 
immunotherapy (3-0-0) 

• Novel Drug Delivery Systems (3-
0-0) 

• Theranostic Systems (3-0-0) 
• Industry collaborated project  

4 credit (0-0-6) x 1 
2 Microbial systems • Engineering Microbes (3-0-0) • Microbial Nanotechnology (3-0-0) 

engineering • Bioprocess Engineering and • Metabolic Engineering for 
Fermentation (3-0-0) biofuels (2-0-0) 

• Mathematical modelling of microbes • Microbial remediation and 
(1-0-2) environmental biotechnology  

• Microbes in food and sustainable 
agriculture  

• Bioenergy (3-0-0) 
• Soil Microbiome & Microbial 

Technology (2-0-0) 
• Biofilms: Bacterial communities 

(3-0-0)  
• Gut microbiomes in health and 

diseases (3-0-0) 
• Downstream processing (3-0-0) 
• Industry collaborated project  
4 credit (0-0-6) x 1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 



12. Curriculum of B.Tech. Bioengineering (Regular) 
 
Table  8a. Curriculum of B.Tech in BB 
Cat Course LTP CH N GC Ca Course LTP CH NC GC 

C t 
 I Semester   II Semester  

IE Engineering 2-1-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Mechanics Electrical 

Engineering 
IS Chemistry  3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 

Computer Science 
IS Physics  3-0-0 3 - 3 IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 

Bioengineering 
IS Chemistry 0-0-2 2 - 1       

Lab 
IS Physics Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1       
IS Mathematics 3-1-0 4 - 4 IS Mathematics II 3-1-0 4 - 4 

I  
IE Engineering 0-0-2 2 - 1 IE Engineering 0-0-2 1 - 1 

Visualization Realization 
NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - NE Engineering Design 0-0-2 2 1 - 

Design I  II  
NH Communicat 0-0-2 2 1 - N Communication Skill 0-0-2 2 1 - 

ion Skill I  H II  
NH Social 0-0-1 1 0 - N Social Connect and 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 

Connect and . H responsibilities II 
responsibiliti 5 
es I 

NH Performing 0-0-1 1 0 - N Performing Arts 0-0-1 1 0.5 - 
Arts I . H II/Sports II 
/Sports I  5 

Total 11-2-12 25 3 16 Total 12-1- 27 3 17 
14 

 III Semester  IV Semester 
LS Probability, 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Materials Science & 3 ×  3 - 3 

statistics and Engineering  (1-0-0)  
stochastic F1: Materials 
process selection, 

F2:Structure of 
materials, 
F3:Polymers 
  

IE Signals and   3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Thermodynamics   3-1-0  4   -     4 
Systems       

IE Introduction   3-0-2 5 - 4 PC Data Structure and 3-0-2 5 - 4 
 to Machine      Algorithm     
 Learning           

 PC    3-0-0 3 - 3 PC Concepts & 2-0-2 4 - 3 
 Biochemistry      Dynamics: Molecular     

 PC    3-0-2 5 - 4  Cell Biology      
Microbio PC  3-0-0 3   - 3 
logy  The Human Immune     

 System: Mechanisms        
 to Detect, Defend     

PC and Attack     0-0-2 2 - 1 
   

12 
 



Biochemistry 
Laboratory  

LS Nanoscience 3-0-0 3 - 3 IH Humanities I  3-0-0 3 -     3 
NE Intro. To 0-0-2 2 1        

Profession  
Total 18-2-6 26 1 22 Total 17-1-6 24 - 21 

 V Semester  VI Semester 
PC Programme     PC Programme     

 Compulsory       Compulsory      
 3-0-2 5 - 4  3-0-0 3 - 3 
Computatio     Introductory Omics     
nal and      3-0-0 3 - 3 
System 3-0-0 3 - 3 Biomaterials     
Biology     Engineering  3-0-1 4 - 3.5 
          
The Human     Biophysics &     
Machine for   -  Structural Biology 3-0-3 6 - 4.5 
Engineers: 3-0-2 5  4      
Quantitative     Deep Learning     
Physiology       3-0-0 3 - 3 
 3-0-2 5 - 4  
  Bioimaging 
Genetics and   
Gene - 
Manipulatio
n  
 
Biosensors 
 
 
 

 Program 3-0-0 3  3       
Elective -I 

IH Humanities 3-0-0 3 - 3 PE Program Elective -II 3-0-0 3  3 
II 

NH Professional 0-1-0 1 1 - N Professional Ethics II 0-1-0 1 1 - 
Ethics I H 

Total 18-1-6 25 1 21 Total 18-1-4 23 1 20 

 VII Semester  VIII Semester 
PP B. Tech. 0-0-6 6 - 3 IH Humanities IV 3-0-0 3 - 3 

Project  
PE Programme 6-0-0 6 - 6 PE Programme Elective 6-0-0  6 - 6 
/ Elective-III / 5&6 

OE &IV  OE 
Open 6-0-0 6  6 Open Electives -III & 4-0-0 4  4 
Electives - IV 
I&II 

IH Humanities 3-0-0 3  3       
III 

IS Environmen 2-0-0 2 - 2       
tal Science 

Total 17-0-6 23 - 20 Total 13-0-0 13 - 13 
Total of graded and Non-Graded Credit  9 150 

Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 
Grand Total  1 165 

5 

13 
 



Distribution of courses in 7th & 8th Semester for specialization 
 

 VII Semester  VIII Semester 
PP B. Tech. Project  0-0-6 6 - 3 IH Humanities IV 3-0-0 3 - 3 
PE Programme 6-0-0 6 - 6 PE Programme Elective 6-0-0   6 - 6 
/ Elective-III &IV  / 5&6 

OE OE 
 Open Electives - 6-0-0 6  6  Open Electives -III & 4-0-0 4  4 

I&II IV 
 Specialization 3-0-0 3  3  Specialization 3-0-0 3  3 

Elective -I Elective -II 
IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3  Specialization 0-0-8 8  4 

Project 
IS Environmental 2-0-0 2 - 2       

Science 
Total 20-0-6 26 - 23 Total 16-0-8 24 - 20 

Total of graded and Non-Graded Credit  9 160 
Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 

Grand Total  15 175 
 
Table 8b. Curriculum of B.Tech.in AI/CS/EE Engineering  

Cat Course LTP C N G Ca Course LTP CH N GC 
H C C t C 

 I Semester   II Semester  
IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IE Engineering 2-1-0 3 - 3 

Electrical Mechanics 
Engineering 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Chemistry  3-0-0 3 - 3 
Computer 
Science 

IE Introduction to 3-0-2 5 - 4 IS Physics  3-0-0 3 - 3 
Bioengineering 

      IS Chemistry Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1 
      IS Physics Lab 0-0-2 2 - 1 

IS Mathematics I  3-1-0 4 - 4 IS Mathematics II 3-1-0 4 - 4 
IE Engineering 0-0-2 2 - 1 IE Engineering 0-0-2 1 - 1 

Visualization Realization 
NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - NE Engineering 0-0-2 2 1 - 

Design I  Design II  
NH Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - N Communication 0-0-2 2 1 - 

Skill I  H Skill II  
NH Social Connect 0-0-1 1 0. - N Social Connect 0-0-1 1 0. - 

and 5 H and 5 
responsibilities I responsibilities II 

NH Performing Arts 0-0-1 1 0. - N Performing Arts 0-0-1 1 0. - 
I /Sports I  5 H II/Sports II 5 

Total 12-1-14 27 3 17 Total 11-2-12 25 3 16 
 III Semester  IV Semester 

LS Programme 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Materials Science 3 ×  3 - 3 
linked & Engineering  1-0-0   
Mathematics Core  

 
PC Data Structures 3-0-2    IE Pattern 3-0-2 5 - 4 

and Algorithms Recognition and 
Machine 
Learning 

IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4 PC     

14 
 



IE Signals and 3-1-0 4 - 4 Programme 6-0-0 6 - 6 
Systems Compulsory  0-0-4 4 - 2 

1. 6 × (1-0-0)  0-2-0 2 - 2 
2. 4 × (0-0-1) 
3. 2 × (0-1-0)   

LS Programme 3-0-0 3 - 3 IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3 - 3 
linked Science 
Core 
 
 

NE Intro. To 0-0-2 2 1        
Profession  
 

Total 15-3-4 22 1 19 Total 15-2-6 23 - 20 
 V Semester  VI Semester 

PC Programme     PC Programme     
 Compulsory  12-0-0 12 - 12  Compulsory  12-0-0 12 - 12 

1. 12× (1-0-0)  0-0-8 8 - 4 1. 12× (1-0-0)  0-0-8 8 - 4 
2. 8 × (0-0-1) 0-2-0 2 - 2 2. 8× (0-0-1) 0-2-0 2 - 2 
3. 2× (0-1-0) 3. 2× (0-1-0) 

IH Humanities II 3-0-0 3 - 3 PE Programme/Ope 3-0-0 3  3 
n Elective 

NH Professional 0-1-0  1 - N Professional 0-1-0  1 - 
Ethics I H Ethics II 

Total 15-3-8 25 1 21 Total 15-3-8 25 1 21 
 VII Semester  VIII Semester 

PP B. Tech. Project  0-0-6 6 - 3 IH Humanities IV 3-0-0 3 - 3 
PE Programme/Ope 10-0-0 10 - 10 PE Programme/Ope 15-0-0 15 - 15 
/ n Electives / n Electives 

OE OE 
IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3       
IS Environmental 2-0-0 2 - 2       

Science 
Total 15-0-6 21 - 18 Total 18-0-0 18 - 18 

Total of graded and Non-Graded Credit  9 150 
Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 

Grand Total  15 165 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 



 13. Curriculum of Double B.Tech. :B.Tech. Bioengineering and Engineering Science 
 
 Table 9. Programme structure of Double B.Tech. 

Cat Course LTP CH N GC Cat Course LTP CH NC GC 
C 

 I Semester   II Semester  
First two semesters same as Table 8a or 8 b 

33 Graded and 6 non graded credits 
 III Semester  IV Semester 

ES Probability, Statistics, 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Materials Science 3 ×  3 - 3 
Stochastic Processes & Engineering  1-0-0   

ES Morden Physics 3-0-0 3 - 3 ES Embedded 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Systems and IoT 

IE Thermodynamics 3-1-0 4 - 4 IE Pattern 3-0-2 5 - 4 
Recognition and 
Machine Learning 

ES Data Structures and 3-0-2 5 - 4 ES Design of 3-0-0 3 - 3 
Algorithms Experiments 

IE Signals and Systems 3-1-0 4 - 4 ES Control Systems 3-0-2 5 - 4 
NE Intro. To Profession  0-0-2 2 1  IH Humanities I 3-0-0 3 - 3 

Total 15-3-4 22 1 19 Total 18-0-6 24 - 21 
 V Semester  VI Semester 

PC Programme     PC Programme     
 Compulsory       Compulsory      
    3-0-0 3 - 3 Concepts & 2-0-2 4 -   3 
 Biochemistry     Dynamics:     
    3-0-2 5 - 4 Molecular Cell 0-0-2 2 -   1 
 Microbiology     Biology      
    3-0-2 5 - 4  3-0-0 3 -   3 
 Computational     Biochemistry     
 and System     Laboratory  3-0-3 6 - 4.5 
 Biology   3-0-2 5 - 4      
        Introductory 3-0-0 3 -   3 
 Genetics and Gene     Omics     
 Manipulation    3-0-2 5 - 4      
      Deep Learning 3-0-0 3 -   3 

 Biosensors        
IH    3-0-0 3 -    3 Bioimaging 

   
 Humanities II The Human 
   Immune System: 
 Mechanisms to 
 Detect, Defend 

and Attack  
 
Biophysics & 3-0-1 4 - 3.5 
Structural Biology 
 

NH Professional Ethics 0-1-0  1 - NH Professional 0-1-0  1 - 
I Ethics II 

Total 18-1-8 26 1 22 Total 17-1-8 25 1 21 
 VII Semester  VIII Semester 

PP B. Tech. Project  0-0-6 6 - 3 PC Biomaterials 3-0-0 3 - 3 
 Engineering     
      
      

     

16 
 



PE Programme/Engi 15-0-0 15 - 15 
/ neering Science 

ES Electives 
PC Programme     IH Humanities III 3-0-0 3 - 3 

 Compulsory      
 3-0-0 3 - 3 
The Human     
Machine for     
Engineers:     
Quantitative   -  
Physiology 
 

PE/ Programme/Engine 15-0-0 15 - 15       
OE ering Science 

Electives 
IS Environmental 2-0-0 2 - 2       

Science 
Total 20-0-6 26 - 23.0 Total 21-0-0 21 - 21 

Total of graded and Non-Graded Credit  9 160 
Non-Graded Design Credits 6 - 

Grand Total  15 175 
 Note: ES are proposed Engineering Science compulsory courses 
 

17 
 



14. Detailed Course Content of Programme Compulsory Courses 
 
Title Biochemistry Number   
Department Biosciences & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3]  
Offered for B. Tech Type Compulsory   
Prerequisite  None    

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Introduce basic chemical properties of biomolecules and principles governing chemical properties of cell. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students will have the ability to: 
Understand the structure-function relationship of biomolecules in living system. 
 
Contents  
Chemistry of Lipids [5 Lectures]: Classes of Lipids and their structure; Membrane Lipids and their properties; Bio 
membrane organization; Sterols; Membrane Transport  
Chemistry of Amino Acids [5 Lectures]: Amino acid structure and properties; Peptide bond; acid-base chemistry 
of amino acids;  isoelectric point 
Chemistry of Proteins [5 Lectures]: Protein structure and its importance; Enzymes; Michaelis-Menten kinetics; 
Enzyme inhibition  
Nucleic acid chemistry [5 Lectures]: Nucleotides; DNA; RNA; Types of RNA  
Properties of Carbohydrates [4 Lectures]: Aldoses, Ketoses; Epimers; Mutarotation; Glycosidic bond 
Carbohydrates Chemistry [5 Lectures]: Common polysaccharides; Reducing & Non reducing sugars; 
Glycoproteins 
Bioenergetics [5 Lectures]: Catabolism; Anabolism; Energy Coupling; High energy bonds formation and 
dissociation 
Metabolic pathways [5 Lectures]: Glycolysis; TCA, Electron Transport Chain, Calvin cycle, Reverse TCA 
Active learning component [3 Lectures]: Flipped classroom (group presentations), debates, case studies on applied 
biochemistry, group discussions, think-pair-share  
 
Text Book 
D. L. Nelson and M. N. Cox, Lehninger Principles of Biochemistry, WH Freeman, (2012), Sixth Edition. 
 
Reference Book 
D. Voet, C. W. Pratt and J. G. Voet, Principles of Biochemistry, Wiley (2012), Fourth  Edition. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
S Dasgupta, Biochemistry I, NPTEL Course Material, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102105034/       

 
  

18 
 



Title Microbiology Number  
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite None        
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Give students foundational knowledge on the microbial world  
2. Provide context as to how these microbes play an essential role in human health and environment 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Understand the biology of microbes and how they impact life on earth 
2. Explore unique structure-function relationships in microbes  
3. Analyse the diversity in microbial metabolism and its adaptability to environmental changes 
 
Contents  
Introduction: the ubiquitous micro-organisms, microbial cell structure and function, primitive microbes to 
modern ones; bacteria, fungi, algae, protozoa and viruses (5 lectures) 
Microbial nutrition and metabolism: nutritional classification of microbes, basics of metabolism (4 lectures)  
Metabolic pathways: Overview of catabolic and anabolic pathways and diversity in microbial metabolism (5 
Lectures). 
Microbial growth and kinetics: Different phases of microbial growth, formulation of culture medium, batch 
and continuous systems (5 lectures) 
Microbial evolution: systematics and taxonomy, Different classes of bacteria (4 lectures). 
Applications of Microbes: production of microbial metabolites & industrial Microbiology (4 lectures) 
Microbial ecology: methods, ecosystems, nutrient cycling (4 lectures) 
Environmental Microbiology: bioremediation, role of microbes in wastewater treatment and toxic waste 
treatment (4 lectures) 
 Medical Microbiology: interaction of microbes with higher organisms, microbial diseases ( 4 lectures) 
 Food Microbiology: microbial spoilage of food, prevention of food spoilage, microbial activity in various 
kinds of foods (3 lectures). 
 
Laboratory Experiments  
Biosafety, Microscopic examination of microbial world - Staining; Preparation and sterilization of microbial 
growth media, Microbial motility and Chemotaxis;  Cultivating microbes by streak plate and pour plate 
method.  Enumeration of microbes by turbidometry; Microbial enumeration by plate count; Effect of pH and 
temperature on microbial growth; Safely discarding microbial cultures  
 
Textbook  
1.  R. Y. Stanier, General Microbiology, Macmillan (1999), 5th edition. 
2.  M. Pelczar, A. Chen, A. Krieg, Microbiology, Tata McGraw Hill Education (2001), 5th edition. 
3.  R. M. Atlas, R. Bartha Microbial Ecology: Fundamentals and applications, Pearson, (1997), 4th edition.   
 
Reference Books  
1.  Brock, et al., Biology of Microorganisms, Benjamin Cummings (2012), 13th edition 
2. D. L. Nelson and M. N. Cox, Lehninger Principles of Biochemistry, WH Freeman, (2012), Sixth Edition. 
3. P. Harley, Klein’s Microbiology, McGraw Hill Higher Education, (2008), 7th edition,  
 
Online Course Material  
David Schauer, and Edward DeLong. 20.106J Systems Microbiology. Fall 2006. Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology: MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 
 

 
 
 

19 
 



Title The Human Immune System: Mechanisms to Detect, Number  
Defend and Attack 

Department Biosciences & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite None    

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an overview of the human immune system and its components 
2. Emphasize immune responses in context of bacterial, viral and parasitic infections. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Evaluate applications of immunology in industry 
2.  Apply their knowledge for design of immunological experiments 
 
Contents  
Immunology-fundamental concepts and anatomy of the immune system [8 Lectures]: Components of innate and 
acquired immunity; complement and inflammatory responses; Innate immune response; mucosal immunity; 
antigens and immunogens, haptens; Major Histocompatibility complex and disease susceptibility. 
Immune responses generated by B and T lymphocytes [6 Lectures]: Immunoglobulins - structure, function 
signalling, kinetics of immune response, memory;  
B cell and T-cell maturation, activation and differentiation[6 Lectures]: antigen processing and presentation, cell-
cell co-operation, Hapten-carrier system. 
Antigen-antibody interactions [8 Lectures]: Precipitation, agglutination and complement mediated immune 
reactions and associated immunological techniques, cell cytotoxicity assays, microarrays, transgenic mice, 
gene knockouts. 
Clinical immunology [14 Lectures]: Immunity to infection, hypersensitivity: Type I-IV; autoimmunity; treatment 
of autoimmune diseases; transplantation: immunological basis of graft rejection; tumor immunology ; 
Immunodeficiencies; anaphylactic shock, immune tolerance, neuroinflammatory diseases, immunotherapy. 
 
Textbook  
1. K. Murphy, P. Travers, M. Walport, C. Janeway, Janeway’s Immunobiology. New York: Garland Science (2012) 

8th edition.  
 
Reference Books  
1. T. J. Kindt, R. A. Goldsby, B. A. Osborne, J. Kuby. Kuby Immunology. New York: W.H. Freeman (2002), First 

edition.  
2. J. Brostoff, J. K. Seaddin, D. Male, I. M. Roitt, Clinical Immunology. London: Gower Medical Pub (2002), First 

edition.  
 
Self-Learning Materials 
Cellular and molecular immunology, Fall 2005, MIT OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 
 

20 
 



Title Concepts and dynamics: molecular cell Number  
biology 

Department Biosciences & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–2 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite None    

Objectives 
The instructor will: 
1. Offer both basic and advance concepts in cellular and molecular biology. The focus of the course is to 

provide basic understanding of functional machineries of cells.  
2. Apprise the students about the dynamics of cellular processes and the regulatory mechanisms involved.   
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to: 
Have the ability to understand the structure and function of cells as a fundamental unit of life.  
 
Contents  
Cell organelles and cellular signalling [5 Lectures]: Structure and function of cellular organelles  
Cellular architecture [5 Lectures]: Cytoplasmic and nuclear compartment, basic protein structure and cellular 
signalling  
Cell division and proliferation [5 Lectures]: Biological principles of mitosis and meiosis; difference of cell  
division among prokaryotes and eukaryotes and cell cycle regulation in health and diseases. 
Mechanisms of cell death & diseases [5 Lectures]: phases and significance linked with apoptosis, morphological 
and biochemical changes associated with apoptotic cells. 
Regulation of gene expression [4 Lectures]: DNA replication, prokaryotic & eukaryotic transcription prokaryotic 
transcription; transcription unit and TATA binding proteins, translation. 
Cellular quality control mechanisms [4 Lectures]: cellular stress conditions and their effects; protein quality 
control mechanisms and nucleic acid quality control mechanism.  
Laboratory experiments: bacterial transformation, mammalian cells transfections; DNA gel electrophoresis; 
cell death assays; localization of proteins in different cellular compartments; DNA ligation and digestion; 
animal cell culture and immunocytochemistry. 
 
Textbook 
1. B. Alberts., Molecular Biology of the cell,  Garland Science, 2014,  6th Edition  
2. G. Karp and N. L Pruitt., Cell and Molecular Biology, John Wiley and Sons, 2016, 8th Edition 
 
Reference Book 
1. L. Benjamin, Gene IX, Jones and Barlett Publishers, 2007, 9th Edition 
2. J.D. Watson,  Molecular Biology of the Gene, Benjamin Cummings, 2007, 6th Edition 
 
Self-Learning Material  
NPTEL Lectures:  on Molecular Cell Biology, Devarajan Karunagaran, IIT Madras 
http://nptel.ac.in/syllabus/102106025/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 



Title Biochemistry Laboratory Number   
Department Biosciences & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 0–0–2 [1]  
Offered for B. Tech Type Compulsory   
Prerequisite  Biochemistry (PC 3rd)    

Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
Give hands-on training on standard biochemical techniques and its applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students will be able to: 
Perform and implement biochemical techniques in research and industrial applications.  
 
Contents  
Identification of biomolecules in samples: proteins, carbohydrates and lipids  
Protein isolation and purification: salting out, chromatography (ion-exchange and affinity), SDS-PAGE 
Characterization of proteins using spectroscopic techniques: absorbance, fluorescence and secondary structure 
determination 
Protein estimation by different methods: BCA, Bradford and Lowry 
Identification and quantification of nucleic acids: absorbance and gel based methods 
 
Text Book 
D. K. Geetha Practical Biochemistry, Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers (2016) 2nd Edition. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
Elizabeth Taylor. 5.36 Biochemistry Laboratory. Spring 2009. Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MIT 
OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 



Course Title Computational and Systems Biology Course No. BBL3XXX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering Structure (L-T-P-C) 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech.  Type Program Compulsory (PC) 
Pre-requisite Basic understanding of molecular   

biology and computation 
Objectives 
1. To train the students in the interdisciplinary areas on the interface of biology and computation. 
2. To provide fundamental understanding of methods in computational biology along with hand on 

training. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Application of computational methods for modelling biological systems. 
2. Ability to model and infer from biological models.  
 
Course Content 
Genome and Sequences [Lectures 2]: Sources of information of biological origin, gene and protein sequences, 
sequence homology and its biological significance (2 lectures) 
Building biological databases with SQL [Lectures 6] : Common database types, relational database design (3 
lectures), database access using SQL (2 lectures), biological databases (1 lecture) 
Sequence Alignment [Lectures 10]: Need for aligning biological sequences, Smith-Waterman algorithm, 
Needleman-Wunsch algorithm (4 lecture), Multiple Sequence Alignment (2 lecture) , Phylogeny (2 lecture), 
Applications, BLAST (2 lecture) 
Gene and promoter prediction [Lectures 4]: Gene prediction, promoter and regulatory element prediction 
Protein Structure Prediction [Lectures 6]: Protein folding (1 lecture), Ab initio and knowledge-based prediction 
of structures, Force fields (3 lectures), Homology modelling (2 lectures) 
Introduction to Mathematical Modelling [2 lecture]: Introduction to Modelling, why model biological systems?, 
examples of models, the modelling process, scope/assumptions, types of models 
Introduction to Static Networks [12 lectures]: Representation of Biological Networks (1 lecture), Introduction to 
Network Biology (3 lectures), Network Topology, Power-law Networks/Network Perturbations (3 lectures), 
Community Detection / Network Motifs (3 lectures), Reconstruction of Gene networks (2 lectures) 
 
Laboratory [10-12 Sessions] 
Database searches and data retrieval, Database creation and data retrieval using MySQL, Writing code for 
translation of nucleic acid sequence to protein sequence, Writing code for dynamic programming and 
performing global alignment, Pairwise sequence alignment: BLAST, Multiple Sequence alignment: CLUSTAL 
OMEGA, Gene prediction tools (Glimmer, GeneMark) Visualisation and analysis of 3D-structures of proteins 
and protein-ligand interactions using graphics tool (RasMol), Homology modelling using SWISS-MODEL, 
Network Biology (Cytoscape), Network Biology (Topologies), Motif and module detection, Parameters of 
network (Cytoscape),, Network Perturbations, reconstruction of gene regulatory network 
 
Text Book 
D. Mount, Bioinformatics: Sequence and Genome Analysis, Cold Spring Harbor laboratory Press (2004), 

Second Edition. 
 
Reference Books 
1. R. Durbin, S. Eddy, A. Krogh, G. Mitchison, Biological Sequence Analysis, Cambridge University Press 

(1998) First Edition. 
2. C. Branden, J. Tooze, Introduction to Protein Structure, Garland Science (1999) Second Edition. 
3. P Baldi, S Brunak, Bioinformatics: The Machine Learning Approach, Bradford Publishers (2001) Second 

Edition.   
 
Multimedia Content 
1. NPTEL course link: Bioanalytical Techniques And Bioinformatics (http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102103044/) 
2. Video lectures on Foundation of Computational and Systems Biology, MIT Open Courseware, 

(https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/biology/7-91j-foundations-of-computational-and-systems-biology-spring-
2014/index.htm). 

3. Lecture Notes for Introduction to Computational Molecular Biology and Genomics by Prof. Mona Singh, 
(https://www.cs.princeton.edu/~mona/computational_biology_notes.html). 

23 
 



Title The Human Machine for Engineers: Number  
Quantitative Physiology 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Compulsory  
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an understanding of the hierarchical organization of chemical and electrical signals and control 

mechanisms for energy, mechanics, flow and transport.  
2. Provide an understanding of the workings of the human body in context of engineering principles so as to 

develop an interdisciplinary outlook to biological as well as engineering problem-solving. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Understand and analyse basic human physiology from an quantitative perspective 
2. Imagine engineering solutions that can solve biological problems and/or get inspired by biology to solve 

engineering problems.  
 

Contents 
Physical and Chemical Foundations of Physiology [6 Lectures]: Homeostasis, feedback control systems, pressure 
driven flow, electrochemical potential and free energy, membrane transport across a biological membrane. 
Physiology of excitable Cells [10 Lectures]: The origin of the resting membrane potential, GHK equation, action 
potentials, membrane excitability, modeling action potentials, saltatory conduction, skeletal muscle 
mechanics, neuromuscular transmission, excitation–contraction coupling motor units, type of contractions, 
fatigue and tetanus.  
Cardiovascular Physiology [7 Lectures]: electricity in cardiac cells, control of cardiac automaticity, ECG, 
cardiovascular mechanics, and dynamics, microcirculation control mechanisms, cerebral and pulmonary 
circulation, congestive heart failure, shock,  
Pulmonary Physiology[6 Lectures]: breathing, resistance to air flow, alveolar gas exchange, acid-base balance, 
neural control of respiration. 
Renal Physiology [13 Lectures]: Body fluid compartments and overview of renal function, Measurements of 
function and clearance, Glomerular filtration/Renal Hemodynamics, Tubular transport of electrolytes and 
water, Concentration and dilution of urine, Regulation of sodium balance, extracellular volume and Blood 
pressure, Renal mechanisms of hypertension. 
 
Text Books 
1. J. Feher Quantitative Human Physiology, Academic Press, 2nd Edition (2016).  
2. K. E. Barrett, S. M. Barman, Ganong’s Review of Medical Physiology, McGraw Hill Education, 26th Edition, 

(2019).  
 
Reference Books 
1. E.N. Marieb Human Anatomy and Physiology, Pearson Education (2006), 6th Edition. 
2. W. F. Boron, E. L. Boulpaep Medical Physiology, Elsevier (2017) 3rd Edition. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Dennis Freeman, 6-021j Quantitative Physiology: Cells and Tissues, Fall 2004, MIT OpenCourseWare 

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 
2. Venegas, J, Mark, F. Quantitative Physiology: Organ Transport Systems, MIT OpenCourseWare 

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

24 
 



Title Biophysics and Structural Biology Number  

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–1 [3.5] 
Offered for B. Tech  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The instructor will provide  
1. In-depth understanding of three dimensional structure of bio-macromolecules and macromolecular 
assemblies governing the cellular life. 
2. Introductory idea of the state of the art tools and techniques in understanding the interactions of 
biological molecules.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
After completion of the course the students are expected to have the ability to - 
1. Conceptualize the basic principles of macromolecular structural assembles and their implications in the 
regulation of biological phenomena. 
2. Understand the basic principles of modern day techniques of structural biology and their applications in 
academia-industrial settings. 
 
Contents 
Structural hierarchy of macromolecules [14 Lectures]: Introduction to structural biology, structure- function 
relationship (5 Lectures); protein folding and its regulation, Role of chaperones (4 Lectures); higher order 
protein assembly, Structural basis of eukaryotic DNA compaction, molecular machines (5 Lectures). 
Determination of macromolecular structure [14 Lectures]: Introduction to macromolecular crystallography: 
Macromolecular crystallization methods and basics of crystal symmetry (5 Lectures); Analysis of X-ray 
diffraction data and validation of crystal structure (5 Lecture); Small Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS) and 
Neutron diffraction to study macromolecular structures (4 Lecture). 
Biophysics of macromolecular interactions [14 Lectures]: Physical forces in macromolecular interactions (2 
lectures), protein -protein and protein -nucleic acid interactions (3 lectures), structure of heme, myoglobin 
and haemoglobin, oxygen binding mechanism (3 lectures), Bohr effect, Energetics of active transport (3 
lectures), Principles of spectroscopic methods for studying macromolecular interaction (3 lectures).  
 
Lab components 
1. Introduction to Macromolecular Structure 
2. Retrieving biochemical information from protein primary structure. 
3. Prediction of protein 3D structure model from amino acid sequence 
4.Validation of protein 3D structure model 
5. Analysis of protein 3D structure - 
a. Overall structure and enzyme active site 
b. Enzyme allosteric site 
c. Enzyme substrate specificity 
d. Enzyme inhibition by small molecule/peptide 
6. Protein -small molecule docking and analysis 
7. Protein-protein docking and analysis 
8. Protein-DNA docking and analysis 
9. Analysis of the effect of mutation(s) in protein interactions 
 
Text Books 
1. A. M. Pherson,  Introduction to Macromolecular Crystallography, Wiley-Blackwell (2009), 2nd Edition.  
2. W. Bialek, Biophysics – Searching for Principles, Princeton University Press (2012). 
3. R. Glaser, Biophysics: An Introduction, Springer (2012) 2nd edition. 
 
Reference Books 
1. D. Voet, C. W. Pratt and J. G. Voet, Principles of Biochemistry, Wiley  (2012), Fourth Edition. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1.https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/biological-engineering/20-430j-fields-forces-and-flows-in-biological-
systems-fall-2015/ 

25 
 



 
Course Title Genetics and Gene Manipulation Number  
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-2 [4] 
Offered for B. Tech  Type Compulsory  
Pre-requisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an overview of the principles of heredity and gene manipulation 
2. Highlight how gene manipulation can be applied to engineer simple and complex life forms and safety 

considerations associated with genetic engineering 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Choose the best method to manipulate DNA for genetic engineering applications 
2. Engineer simple biological systems for biotechnological applications 
3. Practise safety and ethical considerations while manipulating and engineering biological systems 
 
Contents 
Fundamentals of Genetics [18 Lectures]: Introduction, genetic distances, chromosome mapping, natural selection, 
crossovers and recombination (6 lectures), genetic drift, effect measures (6 lectures), study designs, Hardy-
Weinberg law, linkage disequilibrium, linkage and association analysis, principles of inheritance, simple and 
complex diseases, heritability estimation, genetic markers, DNA fingerprinting (6 lectures) 
Gene Manipulation [12 Lectures]: Polymerase Chain Reaction (2 lectures), DNA modifying enzymes (1 lecture), 
strategies for gene cloning (3 lectures), gene editing (1 lecture), vectors, selection & screening (2 lectures), 
sequencing DNA (1 lecture), heterologous expression of genes (2 lectures) 
Genetic Engineering [6 Lectures]: Gene transfer to animal cells & transgenic animals (2 lectures), gene transfer to 
plant cells & transgenic plants (2 lectures), genetically modified organisms (2 lectures) 
Applications of Genetic Engineering [4 Lectures]: Production of important metabolites (1 lecture), introducing new 
traits, improving existing traits (1 lecture), gene therapy, development of model systems, animal cloning (2 
lectures) 
Ethical & Safety Considerations [2 Lectures]: Biosafety considerations for recombinant DNA research (1 lecture), 
Ethical considerations for Genetic Engineering (1 lecture) 
 
Laboratory Experiments (12 exercises) 
Cloning strategies; Transformation, Selection & Screening; Clone confirmation & Sequencing of cloned DNA; 
Directional cloning; Heterologous protein expression; Site directed mutagenesis 
 
Text Books 
1. S. B. Primrose, and R. M. Twyman, Principles of Gene Manipulation & Genomics, Blackwell Publishing 
(2006), 7th Edition. 
2. N. M. Laird, and C. Lange, The Fundamentals of Modern Statistical Genetics, Springer: New York (2011), 
First edition. 

Reference Books 
1. M. Nagarajan, Ed. Metagenomics: Perspectives, Methods, and Applications, Elsevier (2017) 1st Edition,  
2. D. P. Snustad, M. J. Simmons, Principles of Genetics, John Wiley and Sons (2011), 6th Edition. 

 
Self-Learning Material  
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102/103/102103013/ 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102/103/102103074/ 

 
 
 
 
 

26 
 



Title Introductory Omics Number  BBL4XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
1. Introduce the organization of a genome and highlight the complexity of the encoded proteome and 
resulting metabolome  
2. Describe methods to access the genome, proteome and metabolome for specific applications  
3. Highlight applications of genomics, proteomics and metabolomics in biological research  
   
Learning Outcomes  
The students will have the ability to:  
1. Sequence and analyse the genome of a simple organism to understand its functioning  
2. Appreciate the usage of proteomics approaches to obtain a global picture of cellular activities  
3. Understand the metabolic complexity of simple organisms from the perspective of their genome and 

proteome  
   
Contents  
Genomics & Transcriptomics [12 Lectures]: Organization of the genome, Genome mapping (2 lectures), Genome 
sequencing (3 lectures), Comparing genomes (2 lecture), Functional Genomics (2 lectures), Epigenomics (1 
lecture), Genome sequencing projects (1 lectures), Genome databases (1 lectures) 
Proteomics [10 Lectures]: Separation of proteins, Analysis of protein expression [3 Lectures], Detection of post-
translational modifications [2 Lectures] , Reverse phase protein microarrays [2 Lectures], Structural 
proteomics, Interactomics [3 Lectures] 
Metabolomics [14 Lectures]: NMR for metabolomics (2 lectures), Gas chromatography (2 lectures), High-
performance liquid chromatography (2 lectures), Mass spectrometry (5 lectures), Global metabolite profiling 
from biological samples (3 lectures) 
Applications of Omics [6 Lectures]: Genomics & proteomics in Medicine, Biomarkers, Pharmacogenomics & 
personalized medicine (3 lectures), Plant genomes (1 lecture), Microbial genomes (1 lecture), Proteomics and 
metabolomics for biomarker discovery & disease diagnosis (1 lectures) 
   
Text Book  
S. B. Primrose and R. M. Twyman Principles of Gene Manipulation & Genomics, Blackwell Publishing (2006) 
7th Edition. 
 
Reference Books  
1. A. M. Lesk, Introduction to Genomics, Oxford University Press (2017), 3rd Edition. 
2. R. Twyman, Principles of Proteomics, CRC Press (2013), 2nd Edition. 
 
Self-Learning Material   
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102/103/102103017/  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 



Title Biomaterials Engineering Number  
 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech  Type Compulsory 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an insight on the fundamental concepts of biomaterials engineering. 
2. Give an overview of techniques for characterizations of different types of biomaterials for various 
applications. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Analyze the suitability of the material to be used as a biomaterial. 
2. Compare the performance of different biomaterials. 
2. Design a strategy for modification of biomaterials for a specific application.  
 
Contents 
Fundamental of Biomaterials [14 Lectures]: Introduction to biomaterials (2 lectures), types of biomaterials (1 
lectures), processing of biomaterials (4 lectures), surface properties and surface modification of biomaterials 
(3 lectures), physicochemical characterization of biomaterials (4 lectures). (offered by MM department) 
Biological properties of biomaterials [14 Lectures]: Concepts of biocompatibility, immune-compatibility, 
hemocompatibility and biodegradability (5 lectures), Bioconjugations, Biomineralization (4 lectures), 
Biological characterization of biomaterials (5 lectures) (offered by BSBE) 
Applications of Biomaterials [14 Lectures]: Biomimetic and stealth biomaterials (3 lectures), types and 
applications of implants (4 lectures), biomaterials for drug delivery systems (3 lectures), biomaterials for 
tissue engineering (3 lectures), regulatory affairs (1 lecture) (offered by BSBE) 
 
Text Books 
B. Bikramjit, Biomaterials Science and Tissue Engineering, Cambridge University Press (2017), First edition. 
 
Reference Books 
W. R. Wagner, Shelly E. Sakiyama-Elbert, Guigen Zhang, Michael J. Yaszemski, Biomaterials Science: An 
Introduction to Materials in Medicine, Academic Press Inc (2020), 4th edition. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
Prof. Bikramjit Basu, IIT Kanpur, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113/104/113104009/ 
 

 
  

28 
 



15. Detailed Course Content of Programme Elective Courses 
 

Omics 
S. No Title of the course Offered by 

1 Microbiomes and Metagenomics BSBE 

2 Computational Methods for Multi-omics BSBE 

3 Microarray Data Analysis BSBE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

29 
 



Title Microbiomes and Metagenomics Number BBL4XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Elective  
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce microbial communities that are ubiquitous and are functionally adapted to specific 

environments 
2. Outline methods to understand microbial community structure in a given environment 
3. Describe strategies to access the genomic diversity specific to these microbial communities 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Unravel microbial communities associated with specific environments using culture-dependent / 

independent methods 
2. Access metagenomes associated with unique environments to bioprospect enzymes, metabolites and 

bioactive compounds 
 

Contents 
Fractal 1. Quantitative ecology of Microbial communities [14 Lectures]: Development of microbial communities (2 
lectures), selection and succession, diversity and stability of communities (3 lectures), indices for diversity (2 
lectures), structure and function of some natural microbial communities (2 lectures), accessing the 
microbiome: from sample collection to detection of microbial populations, counting microbes (3 lectures), 
measuring microbial biomass and metabolism (2 lectures) 
Fractal 2. The current standard in microbiome profiling [14 Lectures]: Extraction of environmental DNA (2 
lectures), PCR considerations in microbiome research (2 lectures), multiplexing samples, next generation 
sequencing primer (2 lectures), exploiting NGS methods for microbiome profiling (2 lectures), data analyses 
(4 lectures), assessment of community diversity (2 lectures) 
Fractal 3. Metagenome sequencing [14 Lectures]: Metagenome library construction and sequencing (2 lectures), 
metagenome amplification, shotgun metagenome sequencing (3 lectures), single-cell metagenomics (2 
lectures), predicting genes and gene function from metagenomes (2 lectures), metabolic reconstruction of 
microbial communities (2 lectures), bioprospecting from metagenomes (3 lectures) 
 
Text Books 
1. R. Atlas, R. Bartha, Microbial Ecology: Fundamentals and Applications, Pearson 
(1998), 4th edition. 
2. J. Izard, M. Rivera, Eds. Metagenomics for Microbiology, Elsevier (2015), First edition. 
 
Reference Books 
1. M. Nagarajan, Ed. Metagenomics: Perspectives, Methods, and Applications, Elsevier (2017), 1st Edition.  
2. Research articles, Case reports & Review articles as provided by the Instructor 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1.  https://www.coursera.org/learn/microbiome 

 
  

30 
 



Title Computational Methods for Multi- Number BBL4XX0 
omics 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–2 [4] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Programme Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite Introductory Omics   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce to basic knowledge of computational and statistical methods in omics data analysis 
2. Highlight how multi-omics data is to be preprocessed, assessed for integrity, analyzed and interpreted 
appropriately 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify key methods for analysis and integration of omics data based on a given dataset 
2. Efficiently analyze large scale multi-omics data sets 
3. Make biological inference from the analyzed data 
 
Contents 
Fractal 1: Basics of Multi-omics Analysis (14 lectures) 
Genome first and phenome first approaches, biological networks and pathways (4 lectures), multi-omics 
data types and repositories, multi-omics data examples, biological interpretation (4 lectures); homogeneity 
and heterogeneity issues, batch effect correction, normalization and transformation (4 lectures); processing 
of high-throughput multi-omics data sets (2 lectures) 
 
Fractal 2: Horizontal Multi-omics Integration (14 lectures) 
Horizontal integration scheme, single-level omics data, meta-analysis methods (4 lectures); integration 
methods for multiple biological networks, integration of genetically regulated gene expression data (4 
lectures); correlation motif model, ChIP-X data integration, analysis of allele-specific binding in ChIP-Seq 
(3 lectures); illustrative case-studies (3 lectures) 
 
Fractal 3: Vertical Multi-omics Integration (14 lectures) 
Vertical integration schemes including parallel integration and hierarchical integration (3 lectures); 
clustering methods, latent variable approach (4 lectures); Bayesian methods, network-based methods, 
HotNet algorithm (4 lectures); illustrative case-studies (3 lectures) 
 
Laboratory Experiments (14 classes) 
perform multi-omics integration for cancer TCGA data sets (4 lectures); analyze the complex structure of 
repeated measurements from different biological assays using open access data sets (4 lectures); develop a 
meta-analysis approach for integrating data on blood lipid levels (3 lectures); apply visualization approaches 
for the multi-omics analyses and biological interpretation (3 lectures) 
 
Textbook  
1. G. Tseng, D. Ghosh, X. J. Zhou, Integrating Omics Data. Cambridge University press (2015), First 
edition. 
 
Reference Books  
1. A. Vlahou, F. Magni, H. Mischak, J. Zoidakis, Integration of Omics Approaches and Systems Biology for 
clinical applications. Wiley (2018), First edition. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
1. George Michailidis, University of Michigan, Data-driven Approaches and Multi-omics Integration, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OoBvkRpBqf0 
 
 
 
 
 
 

31 
 



Title Microarray Data Analysis Course No. BB4XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering Structure (L-T-P-C) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. Type Elective 
Pre-requisite Basic understanding of molecular biology and   

computation 
Objective 
1. Training students to analyze microarray technology/RNA sequencing gene expression data. 
2. To be knowledgeable about high dimensional biology data analysis. The course will help to minimize 

a major bottleneck in the utilization of these data. 
3. To familiarize the students with the use of advanced tools and methodologies for analyzing 

microarray/RNA seq expression data 
4. Assignments will help them to practice and learn about the tools required in the microarray data 

analysis  
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Be able to understand the structure of the data, the statistical procedures used to remove the inherent 

noise present in the data (pre-processing of the data) 
2. Be able to decide which data analysis tool to use 
3. Be able to understand new methods to describe observations made on a biological phenomenon and 

to make inferences on the biological significance of the results 
 

Contents  
Fractal 1: DNA Microarray: Gene expression biology, The technical foundations, Why are microarray 
important?(1 lecture) What is a DNA microarray and RNA seq data?(2 lectures), Types of microarrays- 
two-channel cDNA arrays, single-channel Affymetrix genechips, microarray platforms (5 lectures), 
Designing a microarray experiment-The basic steps (2 lectures); Microarray Databases: NCBI and 
microarray data management, GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus), Array Express, The benefits of GEO 
and Array Express (4 lectures). 
 
Fractal 2: Microarray Data Normalization : Importance of microarray data pre-processing, Background 
correction (4 lectures), Data normalization, Measuring dissimilarity of expression pattern using 
dissimilarity measures (3 lectures), Pre-processing of RNA seq data (5 lectures), Visualizing 
microarray/RNA seq data using- Principal Component Analysis (2 lectures) 
 
Fractal 3: Microarray Data Analysis: Identification of differentially expressed genes- using statistical and 
computational approaches (4 lectures), Classifying samples from two populations (4 lectures), grouping 
co-expressed genes (2 lectures). Visualization and Functional Analysis: Bio-molecular pathways, gene 
ontology, enrichment analysis, hypergeometric distribution, calculation of P-Value, hypothesis testing, 
multiple hypothesis testing (4 lectures) 
 

   Text books 
1. R. M. Simon, E. L. Korn, L. M. McShane, M. D. Radmacher, Wright G. W., Zhao Y., "Design and 
Analysis of DNA Microarray Investigations", Springer-Verlag New York, 2003, First Edition. 
2. Korpelainen E., Tuimala J., Somervuo J., Huss M., Wong G., "RNA-seq Data Analysis: A Practical 
Approach", CRC Press,  USA, 2014, First edition. 
 
References 
1. Knudsen S., “Guide to Analysis of DNA Microarray data”, John Wiley & Sons, USA, 2004, First Edition. 
2. Stekel D., “Microarray Bioinformatics”, Cambridge University Press, 2003, First edition. 
3. Draghic S., “Data Analysis tools for DNA Microarray”, Chapman and Hall/CRC Press, USA 2002, 
First edition. 
 
Multimedia Content 
Microarray based DNA Detection---- http://nptel.ac.in/ courses/104103018/41 

 

 

32 
 



Biomaterials Engineering 

S. No Title of the course Offered by 

1 Cell-Material Interactions BSBE 

2 Tissue Engineering BSBE 

3 Therapeutic Delivery Systems BSBE 

4 Principles of Biomechanics ME 

5 Additive Manufacturing ME 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

33 
 



Title Cell-Material Interactions Number BBL4XX0  

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech Type Elective 

Pre/Co-requisite Biomaterials Engineering (PC)   

Objectives 
The Instructor will 
1. Provide an insight about cell-material interactions at different length scale essential for the design and 

development of wearable devices, implants, therapeutic formulations and engineered organs. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to:  
1. Analyse the nature of cell-material interactions at molecular level. 
2. Choose appropriate techniques for analysing cell-material interactions. 
3. Develop an appropriate surface modification strategy for improving the performance of 

device/formulations. 
 
Contents 
Fractal 1. Fundamentals of cell-material interactions [14 Lectures]: Cell-material interactions over a length scale 
from macro to nano, mechanism of adhesion of cells (4 lectures), ECM and its interactions with cells (3 
lectures); Reticuloendothelial cell clearance, interaction of immune cells with materials (4 lectures)), 
interaction of microbes with substrate (3 lectures). 
 
Fractal 2. Influence of material properties on cell-material interactions [14 Lectures]: Influence of the surface and 
bulk properties of the materials on physiology of anchorage dependent cells (5 lectures), effects of size and 
morphology of the materials on their interactions with the cells (4 lectures), Important techniques for 
characterizing cell-material interactions (5 lectures). 
 
Fractal 3. Tuning of cell-material interactions [14 Lectures]: Strategies to tune the cellular function by modifying 
material properties for biomedical applications (5 lectures), anchorage promoting peptides, tuning the 
mechanism of biofilm formation (4 lectures), design of stimuli-responsive (optical, electric and magnetic) 
surfaces for modulating cell behaviour (5 lectures). 
 
Text Books 
J. Y. Wong, J. D. Bronzino, Biomaterials, CRC Press (2019), first edition. 
 
Reference Books 
W. R. Wagner, S. E. Sakiyama-Elbert, G. Zhang, M. J. Yaszemski, Biomaterials Science: An Introduction to 
Materials in Medicine, Academic Press Inc (2020), 4th edition. 
Self-Learning Materials  
MIT Open Courseware, Prof. Ioannis Yannas and Prof. Myron Spector, Course number: 20.441J/ 
2.79J/3.96J/HST.522J. https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/biological-engineering/20-441j-biomaterials-tissue-
interactions-fall-2009/lecture-notes/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 



Title Tissue Engineering Number BBL4XX0 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite Biomaterials Engineering (PC)   

Cell-Material Interactions (PE) 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an understanding of the process of repair and regeneration in various tissues and the role of 

different factors therein. 
2. Fundamental concepts and technical aspects of tissue engineering.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Design a tissue-engineered product for a specific application. 
2. Analyze and compare the performance of different tissue-engineered products. 
 
Contents 
Fractal 1. Fundamental concepts of tissue engineering [14 Lectures]: Fundamentals of tissue repair and 
regeneration; manipulation of repair and regeneration (4 lectures); introduction to basic principles of tissue 
engineering (5 lectures); components of an engineered tissue: role of biomaterials, growth factors, bioactive 
molecules and cells (5 lectures). 
Fractal 2. Fabrication and characterization of solid support systems [14 Lectures]:  Fabrication techniques of films 
and hydrogels (4 lectures); fabrication of scaffolds (5 lectures); Physico-chemical characterizations of 
different solid support systems (5 lectures). 
Fractal 3. Development of engineered tissue in vitro [14 Lectures]: Animal cell culture (2D and 3D) (5 lectures); 
strategies for the development of cell-seeded tissue engineering construct (5 lectures); implantation and 
integration of tissue-engineered products (3 lectures); Ethical and regulatory issues in tissue engineering (1 
lecture). 
 
Text Books 
B. Palsson, S. Bhatia, Tissue Engineering, Pearson Prentice Hall (2016), First edition. 
 
Reference Books 
J. P. Fisher, G. Antonios, G. Mikos, J. D. Bronzino, D. R. Peterson, Tissue Engineering: Principles and 
Practices, CRC Press (2017), First edition. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. Introduction to Tissue Engineering, Prof. S. Swaminathan, Centre for Nanotechnology & Advanced 

Biomaterials, SASTRA University. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102/106/102106036/;  
2. Tissue Engineering, Prof. Vignesh Muthuvijayan, Department of Biotechnology, IIT Kanpur. 

https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102/106/102106081/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

35 
 



Title Therapeutic Delivery Systems Number BBL4XX0  

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for B. Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite Biomaterials Engineering (PC)   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide deep insight on the fundamental concepts and advances on various types of therapeutic 

delivery systems. 
2. An understanding principles/rationales of therapeutic delivery systems.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Design a therapeutic delivery system for a specific application. 
2. Decipher and modulate the mechanism of therapeutic drug loading and release. 
3. Formulate novel strategies for personalized drug delivery.  
 
Contents 
Fractal 1. Introduction to therapeutic delivery systems [14 Lectures]: Overview of therapeutic delivery systems 
(3 lectures); rationales of designing therapeutic delivery systems (3 lectures), classification of therapeutic 
delivery systems (3 lectures); characterization of therapeutic delivery systems (5 lectures). 
Fractal 2. Essential concepts of therapeutic delivery systems [14 Lectures]: Strategies of drug loading, 
mechanism of drug release, kinetics of drug release (3 lectures), essentials of pharmaco-kinetics and 
pharmacodynamics (3 lectures), principles of sustained, targeted and on-demand delivery (5 lectures), 
case studies on therapeutic delivery systems (3 lectures). 
 
Text Books 
Y. Chien, Novel Drug Delivery Systems (Drugs and the Pharmaceutical Sciences) CRC Press, 2nd edition 
(2019)ISBN-10: 0367402912 
 
Reference Books 
P. Stroeve, Morteza Mahmoudi Drug Delivery Systems: 1 (World Scientific Series: From Biomaterials 
Towards Medical Devices), (2018) First edition. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
Drug delivery: Principles and Engineering, Prof. Rachit Agarwal, Department of BioSystems Science and 
Engineering, IISc Bangalore. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102/108/102108077/ 

 
  

36 
 



Title Bio-Transport Phenomena Number  
Department BSBE/ME/ChE L-T-P (C) 3-0-0 (3) 
Offered for  B.Tech Type PE 
Prerequisite None   
Objective 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide knowledge about momentum, heat and mass transfer in bio-systems and their analogous 
behavior. 
2.  Train the student to create bio-engineering knowledge using the transport phenomena approach with 
special focus on combined transport problems. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Identify and analyze the properties and mechanisms of momentum, energy and mass transport. 
2. Analyze, design and solve problems combining these transport phenomena in bio-engineering. 
 
Contents 
Basics of Transport phenomena and Momentum Transport (14 Lectures): Introduction, Formulation of transport 
problems from nature, conservation principle, Basic concepts of Vector and Tensor Analysis. (6 Lectures) 
Basic concepts, laminar and turbulent flows, boundary layers, equations of change, dimensional analysis, 
applications to Newtonian & Non-Newtonian fluids. (8 lectures) 
Fundamentals of biological transport processes (14 Lectures): Driving forces for fluid transport in biological 
systems, biological transport process on different length scale , Bio-rheology of  blood and other body fluids 
( 5 lecture), Transport across cell membrane; diffusion, filtration and osmosis (3 lecture), facilitated and 
active transport processes (3 lecture), interstitial fluid transport, fluid flow in bone canaliculi and streaming 
potential ( 3 lecture), 
Circulatory and respiratory transport processes (14 Lectures): Models for blood flow; steady flow in tubes, pulsatile 
flow in a rigid tube, pulsatile flow in an elastic tube (3 lecture), blood flow in capillaries and bolus flow, 
blood flow dynamics in arteries and veins (3 lecture), heart-valve hemodynamics (3 lecture), air flow in the 
lungs: Mechanics of breathing, gas exchange and transport (4 lecture), Application of the principle of bio-
transport phenomenon in medical device development(1 lecture).  
   
Text Books 
1. G. A. Truskey, F. Yuan, D. F. Katz, Transport Phenomena in Biological Systems, Prentice Hall, New   

Jersey (2009), 2nd edition. 
2. R. B. Bird, W. E. Stewart, E. N. Lightfoot, Transport Phenomena, Wiley India (2006), 2nd edition. 
Reference Books: 
1. C. E. Welty, R. E. Wicks, G. L. Wilson, G. L. Rorrer,(2007), Fundamentals of Momentum, Heat, and Mass 

Transfer. Wiley India Pvt. Ltd (2007), 5th edition.  
2. C. J. Geankoplis Transport Processes and Separation Process Principles, Prentice-Hall of India (2004), 4th 

edition. 
3. R. S. Brodkey, H. C. Hershey, Basic concepts in transport phenomena, a unified approach. Vol 1, Brodkey 

Publishing (2003), 1st edition. 
4. W. J. Thompson, (2000) Introduction to Transport Phenomena, Prentice Hall (2000), First edition. 
 
Online Course Material 
Transport Phenomena’ by Prof. S.K. Gupta, NPTEL: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103/102/103102024/ 

 
 
 
 
 

 

37 
 



  Computational and Systems Biology 
 

S. No Title of the course Offered by 

1 Algorithms in Biology BSBE 

2 Modelling Biological Systems BSBE 

3 Mathematical Biology MA 

4 Design of experiments MA 

  

38 
 



Title Algorithms in Biology Number BB6XX 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0[3] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives 
To develop an  understanding of the  main  algorithmic approaches  used  in  solving computational 
problems that arise in the analysis of biomolecular data (such as DNA/RNA/amino acid sequences, mass 
spectra of proteins, whole genomes, or gene expression levels). 
 
Learning outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand various algorithms related to biological data analysis. 
2. Develop new efficient algorithm to solve biological data. 
     
Contents 
[Fractal 1] Greedy Algorithms: Genome Rearrangements (7 lectures), A greedy approach to motif finding (7 
lectures) 
[Fractal 2] Dynamic programming algorithms: The power of DNA sequence comparison (2 lectures), global 
sequence alignment, local sequence alignment (4 lectures), alignment and gap penalties (2 lectures), multiple 
alignment (2 lectures), Gene Prediction, Similarity-Based Approaches to Gene Prediction (4 lectures) 
[Fractal 3] Clustering algorithms: identification of co-expressed groups of genes (2 lectures), construction of 
phylogenetic trees (3 lectures), detection of communities in a biological network (3 lectures) 
Gene selection algorithms: types of gene selection algorithms, SAM, Limma, CFS, mRMR, MRMS (4 lectures), 
ensemble gene selection algorithm (2 lecture) 
 
Textbook 
1. N. C. Jones, P. A. Pevzner An Introduction to Bioinformatics Algorithms, MIT Press (2014), First edition.  
2. G. Benson, R. Page (Eds.) Algorithms in Bioinformatics”, Springer International Edition (2004) First 

edition. 
3. D. Gusfields, Algorithms on strings, trees and sequences: Computer Science and Computational Biology, 

Cambridge University Press (1997), First edition. 
 
Reference Books 
1. S. S. Kremer, Molecular Bioinformatics: Algorithms and Applications, Walter de Gruyter (1996) First 

edition. 
2. R. Durbin, S. R. Eddy, A. Krogh, G. Mitchison. Biological Sequence Analysis: Probabilistic Models of 

Proteins and Nucleic Acid, Cambridge University Press, (1999), First edition. 
3. S. Mitra, S. Datta, T. Perkins, G. Michailidis Introduction to Machine Learning and Bioinformatics, New 

York: Chapman & Hall/CRC Press (2008), First edition. 
 
Online Course Material  
1. https://www.bioinformaticsalgorithms.org/lecture-videos 
2. MIT Open Courseware: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-

096-algorithms-for-computational-biology-spring-2005/lecture-notes/ 

  

39 
 



Course Title Modelling Biological Systems Course No. BBL3XX0 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering Structure (L-T-P-C) 2-0-2 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (BB) Type Program Elective (PE) 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The main objective of the course is to introduce students to various aspects of mathematical modelling in 
the particular context of biological systems. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have a knowledge of important concepts related to the mathematical modelling of complex 
systems, especially metabolic networks, protein interaction networks and gene regulatory networks, and 
will be able to apply them to model the behaviour of biological systems as well as develop strategies for 
manipulating them. 
 
Contents 
Kinetic/Dynamic Modelling of Biological Systems [14 lectures]: Introduction to Dynamic Modelling (2 lectures), 
Computer Simulation (3 lectures), Parameter Estimation (3 lectures), Sensitivity Analysis (2 lectures), case 
study (3 lectures) 
Modelling metabolic networks/Constraint-based analyses [7 lectures]: Introduction to Constraint-based Analyses 
of Metabolic Networks (2 lectures), Constraint-based Analyses of Metabolic Networks: FBA and MoMA (5 
lectures); Current/Advanced Topics in Systems Biology [7 lectures]: Robustness in Biological Systems (4 lectures),  
Robustness and Evolvability in Biological Systems (3 lectures) 
 
Lab: [10-12 Sessions] 
Introduction to MATLAB, Solving ODEs/Parameter Estimation with MATLAB, Parameter Estimation with 
MATLAB, Simulation with CellDesigner (TCA cycle), Constraint-based Analyses of Metabolic Networks 
(FBA and MoMA) 
 
Text Books 
Voit E, A First Course in Systems Biology. Garland Science (2012), First edition. 
 
Reference Books 
1. E. Klipp, Systems biology: a textbook. Wiley-VCH (2009), First edition. 
2. MEJ Newman, Networks: an introduction. Oxford Univ. Press (2011), First edition. 
 
Multimedia Content 
NPTEL Lectures: Computational Systems Biology, Karthik Raman, IIT Madras 
https://nptel.ac.in/noc/individual_course.php?id=noc18-bt22 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

40 
 



Bio imaging 
 

S. No Title of the course Offered by 

1 Electron microscopy for Biology CY 

2 Digital Image processing CS 

3 Special topics in Biomedical Imaging BSBE 

4 Bio-image computing  CS 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

41 
 



Biosensors 

S. No Title of the course Offered by 

1 Whole cell based biosensors BSBE 

2 Microsystems fabrication technology EE 

3 Special topics in biosensors BSBE 

4 Chemosensors CY 

  

42 
 



BBL4XX0 (Level 
Title Whole Cell based Biosensors Number 

400) 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech Type Elective 

Pre / Co-requisite Biosensors (PC)   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the basic regulatory mechanisms of gene expression in prokaryotes 
2. Outline how these gene expression circuits can be rewired to make effective biosensors 
3. Briefly expand into synthetic biology approaches to construct whole-cell biosensors 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Choose the right regulatory circuits for design of effective biosensors 
2. Genetically engineer living prokaryotic systems for sensing 
 
Contents 
Genetic circuitry [20 Lectures]: Transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in 
bacteria (4 lectures), two-component systems (3 lecture), reporter genes and their usage (2 lectures), choice 
of host strain, free living biosensors (2 lectures), immobilized biosensors, immobilization strategies (2 
lectures), DNA manipulation for construction of reporter fusions (1 lecture), RNA-based sensing (4 
lectures), specificity, sensitivity, cross-reactivity (2 lecture). 
Case studies [14 Lectures]: Whole cell biosensors for sensing: antimicrobials (1 lecture), organics, plant 
nutrients (3 lectures), microbial metabolites (2 lectures), heavy metals, xenobiotics (3 lectures), pH, 
temperature (2 lectures), synthetic biology for whole cell biosensor development (3 lectures). 
Seminars on current topics in whole cell biosensors [8 Lectures]: Student-led seminars on current topics in whole 
cell biosensors. Students will present and discuss instructor-approved research articles describing 
development of biosensors using living cells. 
 
Reading Materials 
Research articles & Review articles as provided by the Instructor 
 
Reference Materials 
T. Gerald, Ed. Handbook of cell biosensors, Springer (2020), 1st Edition. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
None 

 
 
  

43 
 



Microbial Systems for Sustainable Development 
 

S. No Title of the course Offered by 

1 Microbial remediation and environmental biotechnology BSBE 

2 Microbes in food and sustainable agriculture BSBE 

3 Bioenergy BSBE 

  

44 
 



Microbial remediation and Environmental 
Title Number BBL4XX0 

Biotechnology 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Microbiology (PC)   

Objectives 
1.  To acquaint students with the way wastes/wastewaters as well as toxic wastes are treated 
2.  The instructor will teach methods pertaining to sustainable wastewater recycling 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to:  
1.  Address the increasing water, soil or air pollution problems arising due to industrialization and how 
biotechnology can circumvent these problems 
2.  Students will be able to design a treatment process based on the characteristics of the wastewater to be 
treated 
 
Contents 
Fractal 1: Introduction, Stoichiometry and bacterial energetics (5 lectures), reactors for wastewater 
treatment, Carbon removal, Nitrification and denitrification, phosphorus remova (6 lectures)l, 
Detoxification of hazardous chemicals (3 lectures). 
Fractal 2: Bioremediation, Type of bioremediation (4 lectures), Engineering strategies for 
bioremediation (5 lectures), case studies on bioremediation (5 lectures)  
Fractal 3: Strategies in solid waste management, landfill & associated hazards (4 lectures) , chemistry 
of biodegradable wastes, composting, solid state fermentation (5 lectures), solid waste to biofuel, 
chemistry of non-biodegradable wastes, the case studies  (5 lectures) 
 
Textbooks 
B.E. Rittmann, P. L. McCarty, Environmental Biotechnology: Principles and Applications, Tata 
McGraw Hill (2001), 2nd edition. 
 
Reference books  
1. M. Shuler, F. Kargi, Bioprocess Engineering: Basic Concepts, Prentice Hall (2002), 2nd  edition. 
2. R. Y. Stanier, General Microbiology, Macmillan (1999), 5th edition. 
 
Self-Learning Materials 
Gargi Singh, Applied Environmental Microbiology, NPTEL Course Material, Department of Civil 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, http://nptel.ac.in/courses/105107173/   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

45 
 



Title Microbes in food and sustainable agriculture Number BBL4XX0   
Department Biosciences & Bioengineering Structure 3-0-0 [3]  
Offered for B. Tech. Type Elective  
Prerequisite Microbiology (PC)    

Objectives  
This course will emphasize on the role of microbes in food, additives and sustainable agriculture and its 
practical applications in the field.  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students will have the ability to: 
Be able to utilize the potential of microbes in creating a sustainable food and agriculture alternatives. 
 
Contents  
Plant-microbe interactions [14 Lectures]:  
Plant community ecology and soil symbiont interactions, soil resources, local niche in shaping community  
[5 Lectures], Microbial interactions, role of root exudates in microbial community growth, types of microbial 
community  [5 Lectures], Factors affecting plant-microbiome interactions (environmental and genetic) [4 
Lectures] 
 Microbes for better food and health [14 Lectures]:  
Prebiotics, probiotics and synbiotics, microbes as nutritional supplement [5 Lectures],  microbial preparation 
of dairy products, microbial production of antibiotics [5 Lectures], Fermented beverages and health benefits, 
quality control [4 Lectures] 
 Microbes for sustainable agriculture [14 Lectures]:  
Microbes as symbiotic microbes, nitrogen fixers and phosphate solubilizer [5 Lectures], Microbial herbicides 
and pesticides, microbes for nutrient recycling [5 Lectures], Phytohormone production and genetically 
modified food [4 Lectures] 
 
Text Books 

 R. Chandra, R. C. Sobti. Microbes for Sustainable Development and Bioremediation. CRC Press (2020), First 
edition. 

Reference Books 
S. Tulasi, J. B. Naraian, A. Prakash, Microbes in food and sustainable agriculture. Springer (2012),  First 
edition. 
  
Self-Learning Materials 
1. Microbiology. Gurvinder Kaur Saini. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102/103/102103015/) 
2. Applied environmental microbiology. Gargi Singh. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105/107/105107173/ 

  

46 
 



Title Bioenergy Course BBL4XX0 (Level 4) 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B Tech. Type Elective 
Prerequisite Microbiology (PC)   

Objectives 
To acquaint students with the principles and applications of bio-energy harnessing systems ranging from 
conventional processes to the latest developments in the area  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to:  
1. Use biomass as sustainable fuel 
2.  Utilize the knowledge of bioenergy systems while integrating bioenergy with other renewable energy 
systems 
 
Contents 
Fractal 1. Thermochemical biomass conversion: Chemical composition, biomass types and characteristics (4 
lectures), biomass pre-treatment and processing, biomass gasification technology (5 lectures), biomass 
boilers, catalytic conversion of biomass to liquid biofuels, life cycle analysis (5 lectures) (offered by CY). 
Fractal 2. Biochemical biomass conversion: Anaerobic fermentation technology, biogas production, process, 
microbiology (4 lectures), different types of bioreactors, basic process kinetics, various types of biofuels,1st 
and 2nd generation biofuels, algal biofuels (5 lectures), ASTM standards for biofuels, basic biochemical 
processes, genetic engineering (5 lectures). 
Fractal 3. Bioelectrochemical systems: Introduction to microbial fuel cells (MFCs), the Nernst equation and 
electrochemical potential difference, the biochemical redox reactions, (5 lectures), the exoelectrogenic 
microbes, MFC components, applications of MFC (5 lectures), bio electrochemical system for hydrogen 
production, artificial photosynthesis (4 lectures). 
 
Textbooks 
German Solar Energy Society, Ecofys, (2006) Planning and installing bioenergy systems: A guide for installers, 
architects and engineers, Earthscan, 2.  Vertes, A. A., Qureshi, A., Yukawa, H.,  Blaschek, H.P.,(2010) Biomass 
to Biofuels, Wiley. 
 
Reference Books 
1.  R. Y. Stanier, General Microbiology, Macmillan (1999), 5th edition. 
2.  M. Pelczar, A. C. Krieg, Microbiology, Tata McGraw Hill Education (2001), 5th edition. 
 
Self-Learning Material 
Michelle O'Malley, Fueling Sustainability: Engineering Microbial Systems for Biofuel Production, Spring 2011, 
MIT OpenCourseWare Massachusetts Institute of Technology, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative 
Commons BY-NC-SA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 



Drug Design and Development 
 

S. No Title of the course Offered by 

1 Principles of drug discovery BSBE 

2 Medicinal chemistry CY, BSBE 

3 Viral infection and antiviral drug development BSBE 

  

48 
 



Title Principles of drug discovery Number BBL4XX0 (Level 400) 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech Type Elective 
Pre/Co-requisite Biophysics and Structural Biology (PC)   

Biochemistry (PC) 
Objective 
The instructor will: 
Focus on route of drug design and discovery 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to:  
Appreciate the underlying principles of drug design and development  

Contents 
Fractal 1. Target Identification and Validation: Drug targets, computer aided drug design, principles of QSAR 
(4 Lectures); pharmacokinetics, administration and dosing (2 Lectures); drug testing: in vivo and in vitro 
(2 Lectures); drug discovery: natural lead, synthetic lead, combinatorial synthesis (3 Lectures); 
pharmacokinetics based drug design (3 Lectures). [14 Lectures] 
Fractal 2. Artificial Intelligence Applications in Drug Discovery: drug target identification, drug databases, 
virtual screening (4 lectures); classifying new drugs, predicting drug responses, applications in clinical 
trials (4 lectures); deep learning based survival prediction, disease prognosis prediction (3 lectures); data 
driven medicine, drug-target interaction prediction (3 lectures). [14 Lectures] 
Fractal 3. Bench-to-Bed side: Chemical development (2 Lectures), patenting (2 Lectures), process 
development (2 Lectures); toxicology (1 Lectures), pharmacology (2 Lectures), drug metabolism (1 
Lectures); clinical trials (2 Lectures); commercialization: regulatory affairs, pipeline development, 
pharmaceutical market places, business opportunities (2 Lectures). [14 Lectures] 
 
Text Books 
K. Stromgaard, P. K. Larsen, U. Madsen, Drug Design and Discovery, CRC Press (2016), 5th Edition. 
 
Reference Books 
E. Stevens, Medicinal Chemistry: The Modern Drug Discovery Process, Pearson Publisher 
(2013), 1st Edition. 
 
Self-Learning Materials 
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/sloan-school-of-management/15-136j-principles-and-practice-of-drug-
development-fall-2013/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

49 
 



Title Medicinal Chemistry Number BBXXX 

Department BSBE L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Elective 

Pre/Co-requisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide understanding of representing stereochemical structures of drug molecules and their important 

features.  
2. Provide knowledge of disconnection of drug molecules followed by targeting them synthetically by 

designing synthetic routes and methods development to achieve them in concise and atom economical 
way.  

 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1. Design and develop a method for targeted biologically active natural products or drug molecule from the 

knowledge of the retrosynthesis and synthetic organic chemistry. 
2. Appreciate and understand the importance of stereochemistry avail in drug molecules. 
 
Contents  
Fractal 1. Pharmacophore [14 lectures]:  Stereochemical feature of pharmacophore (2 Lectures), Natural and 
synthetic pharmacophores (2 Lectures), introduction and importance of natural product chemistry in drug 
development (2 Lectures), analogue-based lead designing (2 Lecture), Examples of Synthetic and natural 
Product-based landmark drugs (1 Lecture), Drug metabolism: Concept of prodrugs (1 Lecture), adverse 
drug reaction (2 Lectures), biotransformation (2 Lectures). 
Fractal 2. Basic Concept of Organic Synthesis [14 lectures]: functional group interconversions, (4 Lectures) donor 
and acceptor, (1 Lecture) chemo-, regio-and stereo-selectivities, (3 Lectures) natural and umpolung 
reactivities, (2 Lectures)  1,3 and 1,5-difunctional compounds, (2 Lectures) importance and role of chiral drug 
molecules  and selective synthesis of chiral drug molecule. (2 Lectures). 
Fractal 3. Synthetic procedure of biologically active molecules [14 lectures]: Few applications of retrosynthetic 
strategies in the total synthesis of selected organic molecules such as: Drugs acting on Central Nervous 
System (2 Lectures), Anti-inflammatory agents (such as paracetamol, naproxine, ibuprofen, aspirin, 
diclofenac)(4 Lectures), Antibiotics and Antifungal agents (2 Lectures), Antiviral agents (1 Lecture), 
Medicinal Plant products [tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)] (2 Lectures), Importance of peptides in drug 
discovery (tubulysin, dolastatin, milnamide)  general aspects of Peptides and Peptidomimetics in 
designing therapeutic molecule (3 Lectures). 

Text Books 
1. S. Warren, Organic Synthesis, The Disconnection Approach Wiley (2014), Third edition.  
2. E. M. Carriera, L. Kvaerno Classics in Stereoselective synthesis, Wiley (2009), First edition. 
3. L. Kurti, B. Czako, Strategic Applications of Named Reactions in Organic Synthesis, Elsevier (2005), First 

edition.  
4. D. S.  Johnson, J. J. Li, The Art of Drug Synthesis. Wiley (2007), First edition. 
 
Reference Books 
1. K. C. Nicolaou, S. A. Snyder, Classics in Total Synthesis-II: Further Targets, Strategies, Methods, Wiley 

(2003), First edition. 
2. R. K. Bansal, Heterocyclic Chemistry, New Age International Private Limited (2017), 5th edition. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. NPTEL Lectures: Organic synthesis - https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104105087/ 
2. NPTEL Lectures: Medicinal Chemistry- https://nptel.ac.in/courses/104106106/ 

 

50 
 



Title Viral infection and antiviral drug development Number  
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech Type Elective 
Prerequisite Biochemistry   
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the fundamental knowledge of Viral pathogenesis and Host cell responses 
2. Provide the detailed knowledge of antiviral drug targets, mechanism of existing antiviral drugs and future 

antiviral therapeutics and drug designing endeavours. 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand the molecular mechanism of viral pathogenesis and host antiviral immune responses. 
2.  Understand the mode of action of common antiviral therapeutics and the fundamentals of antiviral drug 

designing strategies.  
 
Contents  
Basic concept of Virus and Viral pathogenesis:(14 lectures) Virus a unique infectious agent, Classification of virus 
(5 Lectures); Example of pathogenic virus and their life cycles (Host specificity, attachment, replication, 
proliferation, maturation, release and cross species infectivity) (5 Lectures); Virus induced cell transformation 
(4 Lectures) 
Viral infection versus host defense mechanisms: (10 lectures) Host immune responses against viral infection 
(Nonspecific immunity, humoral immunity  and cell mediated immunity) (4 + 4 Lectures) 
Immunopathological effects of viral infections (2 Lectures) 
Antiviral therapies: (18 lectures) Identification and validation of antiviral drug targets (4 Lectures), Strategies 
to develop antiviral drugs (small molecule and peptide based) (4 Lectures) Therapeutic antibodies as antiviral 
drugs, AON and RNAi based antiviral therapies, Immunization (active and passive) as antiviral therapy (5 
Lectures); Mode of action of common antiviral drugs (5 Lectures). 
 
Textbook  
1. E. Lycke and E. Norrby, Text Book of Medical Virology, Elsevier (1983), First edition. 
2. T. J. Kindt, B. A. Osborne, R. A. Goldsby, J. Kuby, Immunology, New York Publisher (2007), 6 th Edition. 
3. E. D. Clercq, Advances in Antiviral Drug design, Volume 5, Elsevier (2007), First edition. 

Reference Books  
Chorghade, M. S., Drug Discovery and Development, Volume 1, Wiley (2006), First edition. 
 
Online Course Material  
1. Dr. Jun Wang, from The University of Arizona, USA Lecture on Influenza Drug Development 

(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8zE3BV6CQcs) 
2. Dr. Vincent  Racaniello, from Columbia University, USA Lecture on antiviral drugs   

(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w4N63NY_jDc) 

51 
 



16. Detailed Course Content of Departmental Specializations 
 
Microbial Systems Engineering 
 

Specialization Core (8 credits) Specialization Elective (12 Credits) 

- Engineering Microbes (3-0-0) - Microbial Nanotechnology (3-0-0) 
- Bioprocess Engineering and - Metabolic Engineering for biofuels (2-0-0) 

Fermentation (3-0-0) - Microbial remediation and environmental 
- Mathematical modelling of microbes (1- biotechnology  

0-2) - Microbes in food and sustainable agriculture  
- Bioenergy (3-0-0) 
- Soil Microbiome & Microbial Technology (2-

0-0) 
- Biofilms: Bacterial communities (3-0-0)  
- Gut microbiomes in health and diseases (3-0-

0) 
- Downstream processing (3-0-0) 
- Industry collaborated project  
       4 credit (0-0-6) x 1 

  

52 
 



Title Engineering Microbes Number  
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0[3] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Specialization Compulsory 
Prerequisite Genetics & Gene Manipulation (PC)   
Objectives  
The Instructor will:  
1. Introduce advanced methods for genetic engineering microbes 
2. Discuss case studies outlining the application of introduced methods to develop engineered microbes for 

applications in various domains 
   
Learning Outcomes  
The students will have the ability to:  
1. Select the appropriate method for genetic engineering of microbes  
2. Develop solutions for their chosen domain of research using genetically engineered microbes or 

microbial communities 
   
Contents  
Genetic manipulation of microbes [16 Lectures]: Strain development for specific applications (2 lectures), basic 
metabolic engineering (3 lectures), microbial community engineering (2 lectures), construction of reporter 
strains and biosensors (4 lectures), applications of genetically engineered microbes in healthcare, food 
production, energy production and environmental remediation (5 lectures). 
Gene & genome engineering [16 Lectures]: Introduction to CRISPR-Cas biology (3 lectures), engineering CRISPR-
cas systems (5 lectures), applications of CRISPR-Cas in microbial system engineering (4 lectures), introduction 
to microbial genomes, minimal genome concept (2 lectures), synthetic genomes (2 lectures). 
Advanced Genetic engineering research prospects in industry [10 Lectures]: Medicines and genetic   engineering; 
insulin (3 lectures), albumin and human growth hormones production (2 lectures); generation of monoclonal 
antibodies and vaccines (2 lectures); gene coding for a useful protein and cloning concepts (3 lectures). 
  
Text Books 
1.   S. B. Primrose,  and R. M. Twyman,  Principles of Gene Manipulation & Genomics, Blackwell 
Publishing (2006), 7th edition. 
2.   Reviews & Research articles provided by the Instructor 
 
Reference Books  
Reviews & Research articles provided by the Instructor 
 
Self-Learning Material   
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102103013/  
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/ biology/7-03-genetics-fall-2004/lecture-notes/  
 

 
  

53 
 



Title Bioprocess Engineering & Fermentation Number BBL4XX0  
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Specialization 
Offered for B Tech. Type 

Compulsory 
Prerequisite Microbiology (PC)   
Objectives 
1. Introducing the students to principles and applications of industrial biotechnology. 
2. Enable students to use their knowledge of microbiology and biochemistry for bioprocess design.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to:  
1. Understanding enzymatic and microbial process kinetics 
2. Ability to identify and understand the key principles and limitations underlying bioprocess design 
 
Contents 
Basics of Biochemical Engineering: Basics of reactions and thermodynamics (5 lectures); Isolation, screening and 
maintenance of industrially important microbes; strain improvement (3 lectures) 
Stoichiometry, bacterial energetics and Microbial growth kinetics: substrate partitioning and cellular yield, energy 
reactions, overall reactions for biological growth (5 lectures), Microbial growth, Basic rate expressions, mass 
balances, Nutrient and electron acceptors (3 lectures). 
Bioreactors: Introduction to bioreactors (2 lectures), Batch and Fed-batch bioreactors, Continuous bioreactors, 
plug flow reactors (5 lectures) and control of bioprocess parameters (2 lectures).  
Fermentation economics:  Various types of dimensionless analysis in mass transfer; heat transfer and 
momentum transfer (5 lectures); Importance of dimensionless number in designing the bioreactors, and scale 
up (3 lectures) 
Industrial Processes and Process economics: Process technology for the production of primary metabolites (4 
lectures), Discussion on the national and international scenario of the products (2 lectures). 
Applications of biotechnology in production of biological: Microbial production of useful metabolites (3 lectures) 
 
Textbooks 
1. M. Shuler, F. Kargi, Bioprocess Engineering: Basic Concepts, Prentice Hall, Englewood, Cliff (2002), 2nd 

edition. 
2. P. F. Stanbury, A. Whitaker, Principles of Fermentation Technology.  Oxford: Pergamon (1997), third 

edition. 
3. P. Doran, Bioprocess engineering principles, Academic Press (1995), 1st edition. 
 
Reference books  
1. R. G. Harrison, P.  Todd, S. R. Rudge, D. P. Petrides, Bioseparations  Science and Engineering. Oxford 
      University Press (2015) 2nd Edition. 
2. C. Ratledge, B. Kristiansen, Basic Biotechnology, Cambridge University Press (2001),  2nd edition. 
3. W. Crueger and A. Cruger, Biotechnology: A text book of Industrial Microbiology, Panima publishing 

Corporation, Delhi (2004), 2nd edition. 
 

Self-Learning Materials 
Kristala Jones Prather. 10.442 Biochemical Engineering. Spring 2005. Massachusetts Institute of Technology: 
MIT OpenCourseWare, https://ocw.mit.edu. License: Creative Commons BY-NC-SA 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

54 
 



Course Title Mathematical modelling of Course No. BBL4XX0 
microbes 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering Structure (L-T-P-C) 1-0-2 [2] 
Offered for B.Tech. (BB) Type Specialization Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The main objective of the course is to introduce students to various aspects of mathematical modelling in the 
particular context of microbial systems. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will have a knowledge of important concepts related to the mathematical modelling of microbial 
systems, and will be able to apply them to model the behaviour of biological systems as well as develop 
strategies for manipulating them. 
 
Contents 
Introduction, Growth of microbial populations, Volume and macromolecular content of cells (4 lectures), 
Biochemical reactions underlying microbial growth (2 lectures), Growth in a changing environment, 
Connecting metabolism and growth: flux balance analysis (4 lectures), Connecting gene expression, 
metabolism and growth: coarse-grained whole-cell models (4 lectures) 
 
Lab 
Modelling microbial growth, Simulation with CellDesigner, Flux balance analysis 
 
Text Books 
E. Voit, A First Course in Systems Biology. Garland Science (2012), First edition. 
 
Reference Books 
1. E. Klipp, Systems biology : a textbook. Wiley (2009), First edition. 
2. MEJ Newman, Networks : an introduction. Oxford Univ. Press (2011), First edition. 
 
Multimedia Content 
NPTEL Lectures:  Computational Systems Biology, Karthik Raman, IIT Madras 
https://nptel.ac.in/noc/individual_course.php?id=noc18-bt22 

 
 
 
  

55 
 



Title Microbial Nanotechnology Number  
 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide deep insight on fundamental concepts and advances in microbial nanotechnology.  
2. Provide overview on the mechanistic understanding on how nanomaterials interact with microbes.   
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Design a greener and eco-friendly synthetic strategy to prepare nanomaterials in bulk scale.  
2. Compare their intrinsic antimicrobial activities of different nanomaterials. 
3. Design a nanomaterial with a specific size and shape for a particular application. 
 
Contents 
Fractal 1. Microbial Synthesis of Nanoparticles [14 Lectures]: Biosynthesis of plasmonic nanoparticles by microbes 
and their mechanism (5 lectures), biosynthesis of magnetic nanoparticles by microbes and their mechanism 
(5 lectures), physico-chemical characterization of nanomaterials (4 lectures).  
 
Fractal 2. Interactions of Microbes with Nanomaterials [14 Lectures]: Nanomaterial–microbe cross-talk: 
physicochemical principles and biological consequences (5 lectures), role of bacteriophages in 
nanotechnology (4 lectures), and antimicrobial properties of nanomaterials (5 lectures). 
 
Fractal 3. Microbial Nanovesicles and Viral Nanoparticles [14 Lectures]: Magnetosomes (3 lectures), bacterial 
membrane vesicles(3 lectures), applications in vaccines and immunotherapeutics (2 lectures), Engineered 
nanoparticles from viruses (3 lectures), case studies on applications of viral nanoparticles in biomedicine (3 
lectures). 
 
Text Books 
1. R. Prasad, B. Siddhardha, M. Dyavaiah, Nanostructures for Antimicrobial and Antibiofilm Applications 

(Nanotechnology in the Life Sciences), Springer (2020), First edition.  
2. N. Cioffi, M. Rai, Nano-Antimicrobials: Progress and Prospects, Springer (2012), First edition.  
 
Reference Books 
1. R. Prasad, Microbial Nanobionics: Volume 1, State-of-the-Art (Nanotechnology in the Life Sciences) (2019), 

Springer, ISBN-10: 3030163822. 
2. R. Prasad, Microbial Nanobionics: Volume 2, Basic Research and Applications (Nanotechnology in the Life 

Sciences) (2019), Springer, ISBN-10: 3030165337. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
N/A 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

56 
 



Course Title Biofilms: Bacterial communities Course No.  
Department  Biosciences & Bioengineering Structure (L-T-P:C) 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Pre-requisite Microbiology    

Objectives 
1. Introduce students to the concept of social living and community formation in bacteria. 
2. To enable students understand role of biofilms in healthcare and environment. 

 
Learning Outcomes 
Students will be able to appreciate the importance of biofilm formation with respect to their beneficial 
and detrimental roles.  
 
Contents  
Biofilm formation [14 Lectures]:  
Introduction and significance [5 Lectures]: Composition of biofilm matrix, Structure and function of matrix, Factors 
contributing to biofilm formation (intrinsic and extrinsic) 
Biofilm life cycle [5 Lectures]: Stages of Biofilm Development, Physiology of biofilms, Viability, metabolism, social 
interactions 
Biofilm evolution [4 Lectures]: Population distribution with the matrix (active and persister cells), multispecies 
biofilm, Evolutionary significance of biofilms 
Occurrence and Relevance of Biofilms [14 Lectures] :  
Environmental Biofilms [5 Lectures]: types of biofilms, bacterial species contribution, multi-species biofilm, 
biofouling, corrosion, plant root nodule interactions, sulfur cycle. 
Clinical Biofilms [5 Lectures]: opportunistic infections, hospital acquired infections, antibiotic resistance, gene 
transfer through biofilm community. 
Methods to study biofilms [4 Lectures]: microscopy (confocal), staining (congo red and crystal voilet), 
quantification of biofilm biomass 
Biofilms in engineering systems [14 Lectures]:  
Biofilms in treatment of waste water treatment, biofiltration, bioremediation, decomposition [5 Lectures], 
Implications food and agriculture industry, as metabolizers [4 Lectures], generation of electric signals, 
biocatalysis, microbial fuel cells [5 Lectures] 
 
Reference: 
1. L. F. Melo, T. R. Bott, M. Fletcher and B. Capdeville. Biofilm-Science and Technology. Springer (1992), First 

edition.  
2. M. Ghannoum, G. A. Toole, Microbial Biofilms. ASM Press (2013), First edition  
 
Self-study material: 
https://www.coursera.org/learn/bacterial-infections 
 

 
 
 
 

57 
 



Title Metabolic Engineering for biofuels  Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The instructor will Introduce basic concepts in metabolic engineering and explores modern approaches in 
metabolic and strain engineering. 
 
 Learning Outcomes 
The students will have an ability to: 
1.  understand microbial metabolism and describe the major metabolic pathways  
2.  Use stoichiometric models to assess metabolic pathways and adopt appropriate genetic engineering 

strategies. 
3. Apply genome-scale models to depict metabolic designs that improve flux towards biofuel production. 
 
Contents 
Introduction to metabolic engineering: Microbial physiology and metabolism, Enzyme & growth Kinetics (5 
lectures) 
Modelling and Flux balance analysis: Modelling kinetics, methods to measure fluxes, metabolic flux analysis, 
flux balance analysis (5 lectures) 
Synthetic Biology for biofuels: Reading writing DNA, Assembling and sequencing DNA (5 lectures) 
Design: Design Transcription, translation, post translation and design pathways  (5 lectures) 
Genome engineering for biofuels: Genome engineering tools  (4 lectures) 
Case studies on biofuel production optimization (4 lectures) 
 
Textbooks 
G. N. Stephanopoulos, A. A.  Aristidou, J. Nielsen, Metabolic engineering: Principles and methodologies. 1st 
ed. San Diego: Academic Press (1998), 1st edition. 

References books    
1. C. S. Smolke, Metabolic pathway engineering handbook: Fundamentals. New York: CRC Press. (2010) 1st 

edition. 
2. C. S. Smolke, Metabolic pathway engineering handbook: Tools and applications. 1st ed. New York: CRC 

Press (2010). 1st edition. 

  

58 
 



Title Soil Microbiome & Microbial Technology  Number BBL7XX0 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0 [2] 
Offered for  Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite    
Objectives 
The instructor will Introduce soil microbiology and soil microbiome in connection with agricultural 
productivity and crop nutrient content. 
 
 Learning Outcomes 
The students will have an ability to: 
1.  depict the desirable soil microbiome   
2.  Understand pant microbe interaction and its effect on crop productivity and it nutrient content. 
3. Engineer microbes for enhancing crop productivity. 
 
Contents 
Introduction: Microbiomes of soil, plant and animal the good and the bad soil microbiome, Analytical 
approaches for microbiome research (5 lectures) 
Soil Microbiome and plant growth connection: Microbiome of soil, factors that shape the host microbiome    (5 
lectures) 
Ecological connection: Microbial symbiosis and host nutrition, the microbiome and host behaviour, host 
microbiomes and disease (6 lectures) 
Adapting to environmental change: The changes in microbiomes, impact assessment (4 lectures) 
Engineering soil microbiomes: Microbial technologies and altering soil microbiomes for improved crop 
productivity and nutrient production by plants  (5 lectures) 
Synthesis and future directions: Future approach to agricultural sustainability, case studies (4 lectures 
 
Textbooks 
R. Antwis,  X. Harrison, M. Cox, M. (Eds.). (2020). Microbiomes of Soils, Plants and Animals: An Integrated 
Approach (Ecological Reviews). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/9781108654418 
 
Reference books  
D. R. Montogomery, A. Bikle, The Hidden Half of Nature: The Microbial Roots of Life and Health. W. W. 
Norton & Company (2016), First edition. 

 
 
 
 
  

59 
 



Title Gut Microbiome in Health & Disease Number  BBL4XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech. (BB) Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite Basic understanding of Microbiology   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Introduce the microbiome with a special emphasis on the human gut microbiome 
2. Outline the process of establishment of the gut microbiome and will highlight the functions of a 

healthy microbiome 
3. Highlight dysbiosis in the gut microbiome associated with certain diseased states and changes in the 

environment 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Appreciate the importance of the various factors including the diet in shaping the gut microbiome   
2. Study the gut microbiome using well defined and well thought out experimental strategies 
3. Understand the metabolic roles of the microbiome and ideate towards development of novel therapies 

that may target the microbiome 
 
Contents 
Introducing the Human Microbiome [8 Lectures]: Microbes on & within us, The great plate count anomaly (1 
lecture), The microbiome in early life (3 lectures), Development of the microbiome with age (4 lectures) 
Exploring the Human Gut Microbiome [8 Lectures]: Accessing the microbiome (bacteria, fungi, viruses) (2 
lectures), Culture based & culture independent methods (2 lectures), Sequencing based approaches, Next-
generation sequencing based approaches (2 lectures), Interpreting microbiome data (2 lectures) 
Functions of the Gut Microbiome [8 Lectures]: Metabolic functions of the microbiome (4 lectures), Microbiome 
in immunity, Infection control by the microbiome (2 lectures), Microbiome in nutrition (2 lectures) 
Factors impacting the Microbiome [6 Lectures]: Mode of delivery, Diet & nutrition (2 lectures), Drugs & 
antibiotics (1 lecture), Ethnicity & race, Host genetics (2 lectures), Early-life infections, Medical procedures, 
Probiotics, Prebiotics (1 lecture) 
Gut microbiome dysbiosis & Disease [7 Lectures]: Obesity, Type II Diabetes (2 lectures), Cancer, Autoimmune 
disorders (2 lectures), Gut-brain axis (2 lectures), Inflammatory bowel disease (1 lecture) 
Therapies targeting the Microbiome [3 Lectures]: Probiotics, Prebiotics (1 lecture), Fecal microbiota 
transplantation (1 lecture), Targeted depletion, Phage therapy (1 lecture) 
 
Text Book 
1. D. Haller, Ed. The Gut Microbiome in Health & Disease, (2018), Springer (2018), 1st Edition. 
2. L. Pray, L. Pillsbury, E. Tomayko, Workshop Summary: The Human Microbiome, Diet & Health, The 

National Academies Press (2012), First edition. 
 
Reference Books 
Research articles, Case reports & Review articles as provided by the Instructor 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. https://www.coursera.org/learn/microbiome 
2. https://www.edx.org/course/nutrition-and-health-human-microbiome 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

60 
 



Title Downstream processing  Number BBL4XX0 (Level 400) 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech Type Specialization  Elective 

Pre/Co-requisite Bioprocess Engineering and Fermentation   
Objective 
The instructor will provide an insightful overview of the integrative nature of different unit operations used  
for the downstream processing of microbial  product . 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to:  
1. Appreciate the underlying principles of downstream processing. 
2. Design an effective and economic downstream processing strategy for a particular microbial product. 
 
Contents 
Fractal 1. Scope of downstream processing, selection of bio-separation techniques (5 lectures), unit operations 
in downstream processing (4 lectures), intracellular vs extracellular products, isolation of intracellular 
products , methods of cell disruption (5 lectures)   
Fractal 2: Methods of solid-liquid extraction (2 lectures), centrifugation and filtration (basic principles, design 
characteristics) (5 lectures), reverse osmosis, ultracentrifugation, sedimentation (5 lectures), electrophoresis 
and dialysis (2 lectures).   
Fractal 3:  Evaporation (2 lectures), liquid-liquid extraction, chromatographic techniques (ion exchange, 
affinity and gel permeation) (5 lectures), spray drying and lyophilization (5 lectures), crystallization in final 
product formulation (2 lectures). 
 
.Text Books 
P. M. Doran, Bioprocess Engineering principles, Academic press (2012), 2nd edition.  
 
Reference Books 
G. Roger, G. Harrison, W. Paul, W. Todd , S. R. Rudge ,P.  Demetri. Petrides, Bioseparations Science and 
Engineering (Topics in Chemical Engineering),  OUP USA (2015), 2nd edition. 
 
Self-Learning Materials 
NPTEL course, Prof. Mukesh Doble, IIT Madras,  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102/106/102106022/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

61 
 



Therapeutic Engineering and Drug Discovery 
 

Specialization Core (8 credits) Specialization Elective (12 Credits) 

- Modern approaches of drug designing - Anti-microbial drug and drug resistance (2-0-0) 
(3-0-0) - Anticancer drug discovery and development 

- Introduction to Precision Medicine (3- (3-0-0) 
0-0) - Modern approaches for immunotherapy (3-0-0) 

- AI based drug discovery (2-0-0) - Novel Drug Delivery Systems (3-0-0) 
 - Theranostic Systems (3-0-0) 
 - Industry collaborated project  

    4 credit (0-0-6) x 1 
 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

62 
 



Title Modern approaches of drug designing Number BBL4XX0 (Level 400) 
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech Type Specialization Compulsory 

Biophysics and Structural Biology (PC) 
Prerequisite   

Biochemistry (PC) 
Objectives 
The instructor will provide:  
1. In-depth understanding of the modern approaches involved in drug designing and drug screening. 
2. Introductory idea of the drug targets and their identification.  
3. Detailed understanding of work flow of modern drug designing. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Conceptualize the basic principles of state of the art techniques used in drug designing and screening 
2. Understand the basic principles of modern day drug designing steps. 
3. Conceptualize the basic principles and applications of modern day drug designing approaches to meet 
up the demands of pharmaceutical industries. 
 
Contents 
Introduction to Drugs, Drug Discovery and Drug targets [9 Lectures]: Definition of drugs; criteria of a good drug; 
historical perspective of drug designing approaches; brief outline of modern day drug designing approaches 
(4 Lectures); Drug targets and Drug target hot spots (5 Lectures). 
Rational drug designing approaches and techniques [18 Lectures]: in silico based approaches to identify drug target 
hotspots (homology modelling, virtual screening, molecular dynamic simulation) (5 Lectures).  Biochemical 
and Biophysical principles to develop drug screening assays (4+4 Lectures); Single molecule based high 
throughput methods of drug screening (5 Lectures)  
Ligand based drug designing approaches [10 Lectures]: Identification of molecular scaffold and pharmacophore 
mapping; pharmacophore screening (3 Lectures); pharmacophore modification and combinatorial chemistry 
(3 Lectures); lead optimization (2 Lectures) 
Validation of therapeutic leads [5 Lectures]: Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology analysis of top therapeutic 
leads (ADMET analysis); drug testing (brief idea of different phases of clinical trial). 
Text Books 
1.  K. Stromgaard, P. K. Larsen, U. Madsen, Drug design and discovery, Taylor and Francis (2016), 5th edition. 
2.  D. Ekinci. Medicinal Chemistry and Drug design, Intechopen (2012), First edition.  
 
Reference Books 
N/A 

Self-Learning Material  
1. http://www.louisville.edu/~mjwell04/design.html 
2. http://www.pharmacy.umaryland.edu/courses/PHAR531/lectures_old/compchem_1.html 

 
  

63 
 



Title Introduction to Precision medicine  Number  
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 
Offered for B.Tech  Type Specialization 

Compulsory 
Prerequisite    
Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
Provide an introduction to precision medicine  
 
Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
Understand fundamentals of techniques to create and analyse effective methods for precision medicine  
 
Contents  
Introduction to Precision Medicine[8Lectures]: fundamentals of genetics as these apply to personalized 
medicine (DNA structure; RNA; protein structures; function of DNA; coding; DNA variations; types of 
genetic variants). 
Ethical Aspects of Precision Medicine [5 Lectures]: Privacy, Informed consent and social justice, case studies.  
Studying Genetic Variation [5 Lectures]: how we study genetic variation in families and populations. Family 
history and inheritance patterns, ancestry, and linkage. Contemporary techniques and technologies [8 Lectures]: 
Technologies used to study genetic variation, including genome-wide association and sequencing. 
Case studies in Precision Medicine I [8 Lectures]: specific cases in personalized medicine. Familial 
hypercholesterolemia: how we use genomic medicine to move from a rare disease to a common medication, 
using genomics to find new drug targets, and a discussion of the side effects of statin therapy.  
Case studies in Precision Medicine II [8 Lectures]: Other case studies will include: cystic fibrosis, Marfan 
syndrome, heart failure, neuropsychiatric diseases, cancer and diabetes.  
 
Textbook  
1. H. P. Deigner, M. Kohl, Precision Medicine Tools and Quantitative Approaches, 1st Edition, Academic 

Press   
2. R.A. Goldsby, J. K. Thomas and A. Barbara, K. Osborne., Kuby Immunology, Freeman,2002, 6th Edition 
 
Reference Books  
1. K. Murphy, P. Travers, M. Walport, M. Janeway, C. Janeway’s Immunobiology. New York: Garland 

Science (2011), 8th edition. 
2. M. T. Madigan, J. M. Martinko, J.M. Brock, Biology of Microorganisms, Prentice-Hall, Inc., (2006), 11th  

Edition. 
 
Online Course Material  
1. NPTEL Video Lectures on Human Molecular Genetics by Prof S Ganesh,  Indian Institute of Technology 

Kanpur (https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102/104/102104052/) 
2. NPTEL Video Lectures on  Essentials in Immunology by Prof. R. Manjunath, Prof. Dipankar Nandi , 

Prof. Anjali Karande, Indian Institute of Science Bangalore  (http://nptel.ac.in/courses/104108055/)  
3. NPTEL Video Lectures on  Cellular and Molecular Immunology by Prof. Sachin Kumar, Indian Institute 

of Technology Guwahati  (http://nptel.ac.in/courses/102103038/)     
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

64 
 



Title      AI based drug discovery Number BB4XX 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 2–0–0[2] 
Offered for B.Tech Type Specialization 

Compulsory 
Prerequisite Nil   
Objectives 
This course will involve a deep dive into recent advances in AI in healthcare, focusing in particular on deep 
learning approaches for drug discovery problems. 
 
Learning outcomes 
The students are expected to: 
1. Understand various methods for representation of a molecule, molecular descriptors, structure 

computation software. 
2. Select/Develop an appropriate DL/ML techniques to perform a particular drug discovery related 

analysis. 
     
Contents 
Fractal 1 [14 lectures]:  Introduction, Chemical formats: Key features of SDL, MDL and PDB files, SMILES 
systems (4 lectures), Morgan algorithm for consistent labelling and structural ordering, Canonical Smile, CML 
file, Conversion of file formats (4 lectures), Molecular descriptor (0-4D descriptors), molecular interaction 
field (MIF) (2 lectures) and comparative molecular field analysis (CoMFA) (1 lecture), molecular fingerprints 
(path based and sub structure), descriptor to data matrix conversion.(3 lectures) 
Fractal 2 [14 lectures]:  Identification of relevant molecular descriptors using feature selection techniques and 
deep learning (3 lectures), application of supervised learning and deep learning for predictive modelling of 
QSAR (3 lectures), ligand based virtual screening (1 lecture), ADME and drug sensitivity prediction (2 
lectures), unsupervised learning for denovo drug molecule design, drug repurposing, and meta data based 
analysis of target-disease-drug association. (5 lectures) 
 
Textbook 
1. N. Brown, Artificial Intelligence in Drug Discovery, Royal Society of Chemistry (2020), 1st edition. 
2. M. Chang, Artificial Intelligence for Drug Development, Precision Medicine, and Healthcare, Taylor & 

Francis Group (2020), 1st edition. 
 
Reference Books 
1. A.R R. Leach, Molecular Modelling: Principles and Applications, Prentice Hall, (2001), 2nd edition. 
2. B. Ramsundar, P. Eastman, P. Walters, V. Pande, Deep Learning for the Life Sciences: Applying Deep 

Learning to Genomics, Microscopy, Drug Discovery, and More, "O'Reilly Media, Inc. (2019), 1st edition. 
 
Self-Learning Material  
1. AI in Drug Discovery Decision Support, IBM Watson Health,    

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SWd7ehX0rus 
2. Deep Learning for Drug Discovery, BayesGroup.ru, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xf2uI4S9IMo  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

65 
 



Title Anti-microbial drugs and drug resistance Number  BBL4XX0 
Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P 2–0–0 [2] 

[C] 
Offered for B.Tech. (BB) Type Specialization 

Elective 
Prerequisite Basic understanding of Microbiology   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Outline how antimicrobials work against microbes and how microbes are evolving resistance against 

these life-saving drugs 
2. Highlight the key drivers of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) and describe what can be done to curb 

AMR 
3. Discuss key problems in solving the AMR problem  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Appreciate the importance of correct use of current antibiotics  
2. Identify potential targets in microbes for development of new antimicrobials 
3. Ideate about solving problems associated with AMR emergence and tackling AMR 
 
Contents 
Antimicrobials [7 Lectures]: Classes of antimicrobials, Mechanism of actions of antimicrobials (2 lectures), 
Cellular targets of antimicrobials (2 lectures), Correct use of antimicrobials (1 lecture), Laboratory testing 
for antibiotic susceptibility (2 lectures) 
Resistance to Antimicrobials [7 Lectures]: General mechanisms of resistance to antimicrobials (3 lectures), 
Evolution of antimicrobial resistance (1 lecture), Genetics of antimicrobial resistance (1 lectures), Molecular 
testing for antibiotic resistance (1 lecture), Transmission of antimicrobial resistance (1 lecture) 
Drivers of Antimicrobial Resistance [4 Lectures]: Inappropriate usage of antimicrobials (1 lecture), Industrial 
use of antimicrobials (2 lectures), Persistence as a driver of antimicrobial resistance (1 lecture) 
Tackling Antimicrobial Resistance [10 Lectures]: Case studies on clinical impact of antimicrobial resistance (2 
lectures), Development of new antimicrobials, Finding novel drug targets in drug resistant bacteria (2 
lectures), Drug repurposing (1 lecture), Antimicrobial stewardship & responsible use of antimicrobials (1 
lecture), Alternative therapies for drug resistant infections (2 lectures), Tracking drug resistant bacteria: 
Molecular epidemiology (2 lectures) 
 
Text Book 
1. J. M. Willey, L. M. Sherwood, C. J. Woolverton, C. J., Prescott’s Microbiology, McGraw Hill (2013), 9th 

Edition. 
2. M. T. Madigan, K. S. Bender, D. H. Buckley, W. M. Sattley, D. A. Stahl, Brock Biology of Microorganisms, 

Pearson (2018), 15th edition. 
 
Reference Books 
Research articles, Case reports & Review articles as provided by the Instructor 

 
Self-Learning Material  
https://www.coursera.org/learn/antimicrobial-resistance 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

66 
 



Anticancer Drug Discovery and Development 
Title Number BBL4XX0 (Level 400) 

Department Bioscience & Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 
Offered for B. Tech. Program 4th Year Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite Biochemistry   

Objectives  
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide the insights of the molecular mechanism of carcinogenesis.  
2. Provide the knowledge of anticancer drug discovery, mechanism of cancer drug resistance and 

upcoming anticancer therapeutics. 

Learning Outcomes  
The students are expected to have the ability to: 
1.  Understand the molecular mechanism of carcinogenesis and cellular factors regulating carcinogenesis. 
2.  Understand the mode of action of common anticancer drugs, molecular mechanism of cancer drug 

resistance. 
3.   Adopt the importance of upcoming therapeutic strategies to combat cancer. 
 
Contents  
Carcinogenesis: (14 lectures) Molecular mechanism of carcinogenesis, Genetic and Epigenetic factors 
regulating the carcinogenesis (5 Lectures); Retrotransposones and carcinogenesis (4Lectures); 
Carcinogenesis associated phenomena (Alteration of kinase activities, Protein turnover kinetics, tissue 
invasion and angiogenesis) (5 Lectures). 
Target identification and anticancer drug discovery: (14 lectures) Brief history of Cancer chemotherapy (2 
Lectures); Biomarkers, Cancer specific validation and use of biomarkers for anticancer drug discovery (4 
Lectures), Example of drug targets for cancer chemotherapy [Cell cycle checkpoint proteins and their 
regulators (2 Lectures); Tumor suppressors (2 Lectures); Cellular Growth factors (2 Lectures) Protein 
turnover enzymes (2 Lectures)] 

Anticancer therapies: (14 lectures) Strategies to develop anticancer drugs (small molecule and peptide based) 
(5 Lectures); Mode of action of common anticancer drugs and Cancer drug resistance (5 Lectures); 
Therapeutic antibodies as anticancer drugs (2 Lectures), AON and RNAi based anticancer therapies, Gene 
editing as cancer therapy (2 Lectures). 

Textbook  
1. B. C. Baguley, and D. J. Kerr, Anticancer Drug Development , (2001), Elsevier (2001), First edition. 
2. L. Wolfgang, Principles of Cancer Treatment and Anticancer Drug Development, (2019), Springer (2019), 
First edition. 

Reference Books  
M. S. Chorghade, Drug Discovery and Development, Volume 1, Wiley (2006). 

Online Course Material  
1. Changing strategies in the war on cancer (Part2) (https://www.adcreview.com/the-

review/cancer/changing-strategies-in-the-war-on-cancer-part-2/) 
2. Changing strategies in the war on cancer (Part3) (https://www.adcreview.com/the-

review/cancer/changing-strategies-in-the-war-on-cancer-part-3/) 
3. Discovery of biomarkers predictive of anticancer drug response in preclinical settings by Dr. Benjamin 

Haibe Kains, University of Toronto, Canda. (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KtR3Ufnn09o) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

67 
 



Title Modern approaches for Number BBL4XX0 (Level 400) 
immunotherapy 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech Type Specialization Elective 

Pre/Co- The human immune system:   
requisite mechanisms to detect, defend and 

attack 
Objective 
The instructor will: 
Provide an insight about the potential of  the component of immune systems as therapeutics 
 
Learning Outcomes 
1. Student will be able to understand the possible consequences of using different component of immune 

systems as therapeutics.  
2. Students will be able to design an immunotherapeutics  
 
Contents 
Fractal 1 [14 lectures]: Principle and scope of immune-therapeutics, classification of immune-therapeutics 
(4 lectures), immune modulators and immunoadjuvant (5 lectures), soluble cytokine receptor and 
recombinant cytokines (5 lectures).  
Fractal 2 [14lecture]: Human monoclonal antibody, human hybridoma and phage display library (4 
lectures), chimeric, humanized and fully human antibodies (4 lectures), engineered therapeutic antibodies 
(type, synthesis, and mechanism of action) (4 lectures), antibody fragments (2 lectures). 
Fractal 3 [14 lectures]:  Principle of cell based adoptive immune therapy (3 lectures), tetramer technology 
and selection of antigen specific CTL (2 lectures), CAR T cell therapy, NK cell therapy (4 lectures), Dendritic 
cell vaccine, immune-adjuvant therapy, exosome mediated treatment (5 lectures).  
 
Text Books 
B. T. Smith, Concepts in Immunology and Immunotherapeutics, American society of health-system 
pharmacists (2008) , 4th Edition. 

Reference Books 
P. A. Ascierto , D. F. Stroncek , E. Wang, Developments in T Cell Based Cancer Immunotherapies, 
Humana (2015), 1st edition. 
 
Self-Learning Materials 
1. MITOpenCourseware, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/biology/7-012-introduction-to-biology-fall-

2004/video-lectures/lecture-22-immunology-1/ 
2. MITOpenCourseware, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/biology/7-341-of-mice-and-men-humanized-

mice-in-cancer-research-spring-2015/ 

 
  

68 
 



Title Novel Drug Delivery Systems Number  

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3–0–0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech Type Specialization Elective 

 
Pre/Co-requisite   

 
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide deep insight on different strategies in designing a drug delivery system to overcome potential 

physiological barriers. 
2. Provide conceptual basis to integrate different drug delivery systems with modern electronic platforms 

for remote monitoring and management of patients.  
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Design a drug delivery system for a specific application. 
2. Formulate novel strategies for personalized drug delivery.  
 
Contents 
Fractal 1. Sustained and stimuli-responsive drug delivery systems [14 lectures]: particulate and vesicular drug 
delivery systems (5 lectures), hydrogels (2 lectures), pH, temperature, light and magnetic field responsive 
drug delivery systems (5 lectures), iontophoretic drug delivery systems (2 lectures). 
 
Fractal 2. Site-specific drug delivery [14lectures]: Route of drug administration and its limitations, site-specific 
drug delivery systems (4 lectures), delivery vehicles to cross blood brain barrier (BBB), colon-specific drug 
delivery, ocular drug delivery system (5 lectures), transdermal patches to cross skin barrier, tumor specific 
drug delivery, lung specific drug delivery (5 lectures). 
 
Fractal 3. State-of-art drug delivery systems [14 Lectures]: IoT and remote controlled drug delivery systems (5 
lectures), biomimetic systems for drug delivery (3 lectures); delivery of cell based therapeutics (3 lectures), 
case studies on state-of-art drug delivery systems (3 lectures).  
 
Text Books 
1. W. R. Wagner, Biomaterials Science: An Introduction to Materials in Medicine, Academic Press Inc (2020); 

4th edition. 
2. R.K. Keservani, A.K. Sharma, Nanoparticulate Drug Delivery Systems, Apple Academic Press (2019), 1st 

edition. 
 
Reference Books 
Controlled and novel drug delivery, N.K. Jain, 2019, CBN Publishers, 1st edition. 
 
Self-Learning Materials  
1. Prof. Rachit Agarwal, IISc Bangalore, https://nptel.ac.in/courses/102/108/102108077/ 
2. MIT Open Courseware, https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/biology/7-341-the-microbiome-and-drug-

delivery-cross-species-communication-in-health-and-disease-spring-2018/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

69 
 



Title Theranostic Systems Number  
 

Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Offered for B. Tech Type Specialization Elective 
Prerequisite None   
Objectives 
The Instructor will: 
1. Provide an insight on the design principles of theranostic systems. 
2. Introduce various techniques for characterizations of theranostic systems. 
3. Decipher the possible mode of application of theranostic systems in diseased conditions. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: 
1. Design and develop a theranostic system for a specific application.  
2. Compare the performance of different theranostic materials on the basis of their physico-chemical and 

biological properties. 
 
Contents 
Fractal 1. Introduction to theranostic systems [14 lectures]: Key features of theranostic systems (1 lectures); 
combinatorial modalities of theranostic system (1 lectures); basic theranostic templates: mesoporous 
materials (2 lectures), carbon nanostructures (2 lectures), membrane vesicles (2 lectures); surface 
engineering of theranostic platforms (2 lectures); up- and down-conversion, magnetic, plasmonic and 
radioactive platforms (4 lectures).  
 
Fractal 2. Physico-chemical characterization of theranostic systems [14 lectures]: photophysical and photochemical 
properties (3 lectures), magnetic properties (T1 and T2 relaxations) (2 lectures), hyperthermia (4 lectures); 
plasmonic properties: localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) (3 lectures), quantification of 
radioactivity (2 lectures).  
 
Fractal 3. Case studies on theranostic systems [14 lectures]: Case studies on theranostic systems for cancer (5 
lectures), vascular and brain diseases (5 lectures); Case studies on laparoscopy and endoscopy-guided 
theranostic systems (4 lectures).  
 
Text Books 
1. Z. Dai, Advances in Nanotheranostics I: Design and Fabrication of Theranostic Nanoparticles (Springer 

Series in Biomaterials Science and Engineering Book 6) 1st edition (2016) ISBN-10: 978-3-662-48544-6. 
2. Z. Dai, Advances in Nanotheranostics II: Cancer Theranostic Nanomedicine (Springer Series in 

Biomaterials Science and Engineering Book 7) 1st edition (2016) ISBN 978-981-10-0063-8 . 
 
Reference Books 
1. S.T. Selvan, K. Narayanan, Introduction to Nanotheranostics (Springer Briefs in Applied Sciences and    

Technology) 1st edition (2016) ISBN 978-981-10-1008-8 
2. J. Conde, Handbook of Nanomaterials for Cancer Theranostics, Elsevier, (2018) ISBN: 978-012-81-3339-2.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70 
 



Program-linked Science Elective/Open Elective 
 

Title Neuroscience Number  
Department Bioscience and Bioengineering L-T-P [C] 3-0-0 [3] 

Program-linked Science 
Offered for B. Tech Type 

course/Open Elective 
Prerequisite    

Objectives 
1. The course provides insights of human nervous systems.  
2. This course offers an introduction to the basic principles of brain functioning. 
 
Learning Outcomes 
The students will have the ability to: Gain experience for the future forefront of their research career and this 
can be applied to fields, where understanding brain response to complex machine sensory information inputs. 
 
Contents 
 
Introduction of Neuroscience [5 Lectures]: Nervous systems: basic structure, development and complexity and 
cellular component of nervous tissue. 
 
Neuronal architecture [5 Lectures]: structure and functional properties of neurons, types of neurons and 
supporting cells of nervous tissue. 
 
Neurotransmitters and Synaptic Integration [5 Lectures]: Neurotransmitters signaling, action potential 
propagation, synapse and synaptic transmission and electrical or chemical synapses. 
 
Brief Anatomy of Brain [5 Lectures]: Brain structure overview, white and gray matter and different sectional 
views of brain. 
 
Fundamentals of Sensory Systems [5 Lectures]: Sensory systems  principles, sensitization and desensitization of 
sensory receptors and sensory coding. 
  
Somatosensory System [5 Lectures]: Organization of somatosensory system, various receptors viz 
mechanoreceptors, proprioceptors, nociceptors, thermal receptors and visceral sensations. 
 
Motor System [5 Lectures]: Neuromuscular junction, primary and secondary motor cortex and integration of 
sensory signals to motor actions and motor neuron diseases. 
 
Auditory System [5 Lectures]: Structure of internal ear, temporal responsiveness, ribbon synapse and mapping 
at auditory cortex. 
 
Visual System [5 Lectures]: Structural organization of visual pathways; visual perception and processing, 
photoreceptors and high-level visual processing. 
 
Reference Books 
1. E. R. Kandel., Principles of Neural Science,  Elsevier (2018), 5th Edition. 
2. Zigmond., Fundamental Neuroscience,  Elsevier (2018), 5th Edition. 
  
Self-Learning Material  
Dr. Varadhan SKM, Neuroscience of Human Movement, NPTEL Course Material Department of Biomedical 
Engineering IIT Madras, Link: https://nptel.ac.in/noc/courses/noc18/SEM2/noc18-ge13/ 

 

71








Welcome to the Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering
The Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur, established in 2009 offers a B.Tech. program in Bioengineering, an M.Tech. and M.Tech-Ph.D. dual degree programs in Bioscience & Bioengineering. Our programs are uniquely designed to inspire innovations in biotechnology, engineering, and medicine from an understanding of† biological systems.† This capacity building is assuming importance in the present times for providing solutions to societal problems in trans-disciplinary frameworks. A major focus is on neurosciences and neurodegenerative disorders, mechanistic biology, environmental and medical microbiology, computational biology, precision health, and bioprospecting for novel molecules and bio-actives from natural resources of the Thar ecoregion. We also offer a competitive Ph.D. program to inculcate scientific temper, independent thinking, and skillsets for scientific entrepreneurship. We encourage and provide avenues for the participation of bioengineering graduates with diverse engineering disciplines to develop technologies for:
1. Affordable and Smart Healthcare
2. Clean Environment
3. Precision Medicine and Health
4. Sustainable and Affordable Energy
Faculties at the department with wide-ranging expertise,† conduct fundamental and translational research in focus areas that are contemporary and aligned to major sustainable development goals. We are passionate about research and actively communicate our science through regular outreach programs.
Bioscience and Bioengineering are pivotal to India's growth. driving innovation and advancing technology in healthcare. Agriculture and environmental sustainability. The Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur plays a key role in implementing diverse advanced biological research areas within these fields. with a strong focus on fostering research and development (R&D) and entrepreneurship.
By offering a multidisciplinary platform that integrates cutting-edge research in drug discovery, genomics, and affordable and integrative precision healthcare solutions. Big Data Biology and bioinformatics. In addition. The department actively promotes entrepreneurship by providing incubation support, facilitating industry collaborations, and encouraging the growth of startup ventures in biosciences.
With access to advanced research facilities and guidance from expert faculty members, students can transform their ideas into practical, marketable solutions, benefiting industries such as healthcare, agriculture, and biomanufacturing.
BSBE Department, IIT Jodhpur, emphasizes interdisciplinary research in the near future, which may also align with national initiatives like the BioE3 policy to promote R&D, commercialization, and the establishment of bioeconomy hubs. The curriculum is thoughtfully designed to meet the diverse aspirations of students entering the fields of biosciences and bioengineering. This approach not only strengthens the academic peers ecosystem but also creates employment opportunities and enhances societal well-being
A warm welcome to the Department of Chemistry at IIT Jodhpur, which was established in 2015. Since the inception, the department has taken major strides forward in teaching, research and technology development. Our department offers a variety of academic programs including M.Sc. (2 Years), M.Sc. (Chemistry)-M.Tech. (Materials Engineering) with Specialization, BS in Chemistry with Specialization (4 years), and Ph.D. programs. We also provide core and elective courses in chemistry and related fields for undergraduate B.Tech. engineering students. The department offers Chemistry courses for 4-year Integrated B.Sc.-B.Ed. Program (ITEP), which is in alignment with NEP 2020 to support teacher preparation and foster professional development.
Besides teaching, the Department is striving to be acknowledged for excellence in research and technology. Our goal is to foster an environment where everyone can thrive, reach their full potential, and contribute to cutting-edge scientific advancements. We have the latest state of the art basic teaching laboratories and several thematic research laboratories. Our current faculty strength is 19 and they are carrying out research activities in all major areas of chemical sciences, namely, organic synthesis and catalysis, chemical biology, main group chemistry and organometallics, nanomaterials, spectroscopy and chemical dynamics, biophysical chemistry and computational chemistry. The cutting-edge research in the thrust areas by our faculty members are published in international peer-reviewed journals of well-repute. In short IIT Jodhpur Chemistry department is where Chemistry meets Technology through Collaboration, Communication and Cooperation. I encourage the future aspirants to get enrolled at IIT Jodhpur and wish you all the very best in your future endeavours. Thank you.
Welcome To The Department of Chemical Engineering
Translation of molecular information into discovery of new products and processes with Industry 4.0+†
Vision & Mission of the Department
To become a globally recognized department of chemical engineering through its contribution in emerging and demand-driven areas with multidisciplinary approach.†††
The Department of Chemical Engineering offers under-graduate (B.Tech.) and post-graduate (M.Tech., M.Tech.-Ph.D. and Ph.D.) programs in chemical engineering. Through the academic programs, the department is making a conscious effort to establish itself as a leading institute in the new genre of chemical engineering education. The program involves traditional courses, emerging areas and specialisations such as process engineering intelligence, molecular engineering and sustainability.
In line with the new education policy, B.Tech. (Chemical Engineering) students will have unique opportunity and flexibility for:
1. Minor in (a)Management (b)Entrepreneurship (c)Data Science
2. Five year B.Tech.+M.Tech./ MBA
3. One year Engineering Innovation opportunity

Traditionally, chemical engineering teaching focuses on subjects like material and energy balance, transport phenomena, thermodynamics, mass transfer, heat transfer, fluid mechanics, chemical reaction engineering, numerical analysis, computational systems, biotechnology, petroleum-petrochemicals, polymers and safety engineering. With the advent of the era of Industry 4.0 in chemical companies, artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), data analytics, internet of things (IoT), molecular engineering, nano-composites; the discipline is being transformed by the incorporation of new emerging technologies and demand-driven areas.
The department is keen on collaboration with industry and academia worldwide. At present, Chemical Engineering Department is sharing its expertise with the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS), Ministry of Jal Shakti; Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), Ministry of Defence; International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) etc. Department has signed MoU with the industries for providing consultancy services. Department is also actively involved in Scientific Social Responsibility (SSR) through Unnat Bharat Abhiyan (UBA) and other societal initiatives.
Department has research interest in core and emerging areas; and is looking for faculty members in different areas of chemical engineering. Prospective candidates are encouraged to visit our recruitment page and apply.
The rapidly urbanizing society and increasing quality of life demand reliable and intelligent infrastructure systems which are capable of catering to the societal needs at different scales ñ from an individual to the community level.†Consequently, the civil and infrastructure industry has undergone profound changes and is constantly evolving. However, the new-age designs and innovations in the civil and infrastructure industry can only be driven by a group of engineering graduates having multidisciplinary training and a sound understanding of emerging technologies. The Department of Civil†and Infrastructure Engineering, IIT Jodhpur† esatablished in January 2020. We started academics programs in the academic year 2020-2021. The department offers unique programs that incorporate and integrate the elements of conventional civil engineering with advanced transformative technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI), cyber-physical-systems (CPS), digital twins (DT), and automated management and information systems. Additionally, a major thrust is also planned on the design, implementation, and maintenance of large-scale integrated infrastructure systems across different domains.
The focus areas of the department are :
1. Energy and Environment
2. Building Sciences, Safety, and Services
3. Applications of AI, IoT and CPS in Civil and Infrastructure Engineering
4. Smart and Integrated Infrastructure
5. Urban Architecture and Planning
6. Construction Technology and Management
7. Transportation Engineering
8. Structural Engineering
9. Geotechnical Engineering
10. Water resources Engineering
11. Engineering Geology
Vision
"The Department strives to be an internationally renowned centre of excellence in education, research, and innovation with a major focus on sustainability and digitalization of infrastructure."
Missions
* Develop unique courses in the field of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering through advanced UG and PG programs with a multidisciplinary perspective.
* Establish high quality teaching and research facilities in the areas of smart, resilient, and sustainable infrastructure engineering to foster the needs of society.
* Promote consilient research through application of AI/ML, cyber-physical-systems, digital twin and advanced visualization in the areas of Energy, Environment, Transportation, and Construction.
* Promote innovative and entrepreneurial activities through intellectual property generation and transfer.
* Nurture the potential of students to become future leaders in the Civil Engineering industry for leadership achievements, scientific breakthroughs and social welfare.
Welcome to the Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Computer Science and Engineering, today, plays a major role in transforming every aspect of human life - in addressing social challenges and catalyzing the ongoing wave of the industrial revolution. The department is driven by its commitment to excel in next generation technology development and research. Our mission is to strengthen industry-academia collaborations and prepare our students to contribute to multi-disciplinary projects and R&D for solving problems of national interest.
Vision
To be among the top 10 departments in terms of research contributions, practical impact, and applications of Computer Science and Engineering in the country in the next 3 years, and internationally well known in some focused areas in the next 5 years. Some of our missions are to achieve excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of CSE and allied subject for innovative discoveries; develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating; and develop and support the notion of ìcomputing for allî across disciplines at the institute.

Mission
Our missions are to achieve excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of CSE and allied subject for innovative discoveries; develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating; and develop and support the notion of ìcomputing for allî across disciplines at the institute.
1. (M1) Achieving excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of CSE and allied subjects for innovative discoveries.
2. (M2) Develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating within the institute, as well by means of international, national and regional institutes. The collaborations may be fostered by research visits, collaborative projects, joint thesis, internship guidance, research mentoring etc.
3. (M3) Develop and support the notion of ìcomputing for allî across disciplines at the institute.
4. (M4) Embracing shared dialogue across disciplines and encouraging experiential learning to redefine the contours of traditional Computer Science teaching and learning. Be one of the leading departments in the country for hybrid CSE education.
5. (M5) Define and solve real-world problems in collaboration with industry, and develop industry- connect by means of research grants/ consultancies, and collaborative projects. Develop Start-up ecosystem in emerging areas of computing in collaboration with other departments at IIT Jodhpur.
6. (M6) Dissemination of knowledge without physical boundaries, i.e. classroom, online and other modes of teaching, to create a workforce which is ready to ethically solve technological challenges of the next generation.
7. (M7) Provide thought leadership in public policy and ethics of emerging computing technologies towards building an equitable and ethical society.
Welcome to the Department of Electrical Engineering
The Department of Electrical Engineering primarily focuses on imparting quality education and preparing students to face future technological challenges. The vision of the Department is to enhance the research environment and to innovate in pedagogy to address the challenges of socio-economic and human resource development.
The Department is committed to engage in high-quality research by Faculty Members and Students, and in the pursuit of excellence in teaching. The Department offers B.Tech. in Electrical Engineering with broad range of major and minor specializations and three state-of-the-art M.Tech. programs in Sensors and Internet of Things (SIoT), Cyber Physical Systems (CPS), and Intelligent Communication Systems (ICS).
The Department also runs dual degree (M.Tech. + Ph.D.) programs in Intelligent Communication Systems, Sensors and Internet of Things (SIoT) and Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) as well as Ph.D. program with a broad range of specializations covering detailed aspects of Microelectronics, Signal Processing, Communication, Microwave & Photonics, Power systems, Control systems etc. The Department is also starting a new Executive MTech Program in Intelligent VLSI Systems (for working professionals) from July 2022.
The prospective undergraduate and postgraduate students are encouraged to visit the Academic Programs (UG Program, PG Programs and Doctoral Programs) page of the Department to know more about the details of courses offered in the department.
To know more about the current research themes of the faculty members, the prospective students are encouraged to visit the Research Overview page of the Department. Technology Tracks currently pursued by the Department include emerging and challenging fields that culminate at the intersection of several traditional research areas.
Welcome to the Department of Mathematics
Mathematics, being the basis of many disciplines, is a subject that evolves with time and creates new theories to solve real-world challenging problems. Our department has been taking a leading role in developing new methods to model such situations that can be used in diverse areas of computer science, engineering, and basic sciences. The department has faculty with research interests in the areas of Algebra, Mathematical Physics, Scientific Computation, Numerical Analysis, Partial Differential Equations, Topological Dynamics, Low Dimensional Chaos, Dynamical Systems, Renormalization in Low-dimensional dynamics, Wavelet Analysis, Fractional Transform Theory, Image Processing, Financial Risk Analysis, Categorical Data Analysis, Reliability Theory, Applied Probability.
We are excited to offer high-quality programs at postgraduate level for students who wish to apply math to science or engineering such as a two-year M.Sc. program in Mathematics, a four-year M.Sc-M.Tech program in Mathematics-Data and Computational Sciences, a two year M.Tech program in Data and Computational Sciences. We also offer an M.Tech-Ph.D. dual degree program in Data and Computational Sciences and a Ph.D. Program with specialization in different areas of Mathematics to those who wish to earn a deeper understanding of pure and applied Mathematics.
The Department of Mathematics is dedicated to advancing the fields of pure mathematics, applied mathematics and statistics. Our vision is to emphasize both the fundamental principles of core mathematics and the foundational concepts essential for analyzing key principles applied in cutting-edge technologies. Since its establishment, the department has been actively engaged in research across various critical areas of mathematics and computing.
The department also aimed to explore modern aspects of mathematics coupled with computational capabilities to develop a workforce specialized in mathematical aspects of key technologies. With this inclination, the department initiated academic programs to address the mathematical needs of both industry and academia. Currently, we offer various programmes, namely, a two-year M.Sc. program in Mathematics, a four-year M.Sc-M.Tech program in Mathematics-Data and Computational Sciences, a two year M.Tech program in Data and Computational Sciences, an Integrated Teacher in Education Program (ITEP) with specialization in Mathematics, and a Ph.D. Program with specialization in different areas of Mathematics, computing and Data and Computational Sciences. The department also offers a Minor program in Data Science for the UG students.
The department faculty are active researchers in different areas, namely, Algebra, Complex Analysis, Topological Dynamics, LowDimensional Chaos, Renormalization in Low-dimensional dynamics, Dynamics in Neuroscience, Mathematical Physics, Scientific Computation, Numerical Analysis, Optimization Techniques, Partial Differential Equations, Wavelet Analysis, Fractional Transform Theory, Image Processing, Financial Risk Analysis, Categorical Data Analysis, Reliability Theory, Financial Mathematics and Applied Probability. The department has all necessary research infrastructures including High Performance Computing.
Welcome to the Department of Mechanical Engineering
The Department of Mechanical Engineering at IIT Jodhpur is devoted to quality engineering education and pursuits the excellence in research. It is dedicated to preparing students to face the emerging challenges faced by society. The vision of the Department is to translate its research and to innovate in pedagogy to enable ignited young minds to find technological solutions for upcoming challenges. The Department offers B. Tech. M. Tech. and Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering within three major domains of Thermofluids, Design, and Smart Manufacturing. The students also have the opportunity to work with an interdisciplinary specialization in emerging areas such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), Internet of things (IoT), Smart Healthcare, and Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS).

At IIT Jodhpur, mechanical engineers are educated in a way not only to adapt but to define direct change. This is reflected in the portfolio of the current activities of the Department. Faculty members are involved in a wide range of projects in the areas of energy conversion and power systems, heat transfer and fluid mechanics, mechanics of solid, mechanical vibrations, robotics, autonomous unmanned vehicles, design optimization, acoustics and noise control, control systems, rotor dynamics, nanomaterials, biomechanics, bio-inspired thermo-fluids, fluid-structure interaction, etc. to name a few. Additionally, efforts are being made to introduce advanced concepts like smart manufacturing, Industry 4.O, Smart scientific computing techniques, high-performance computing, applications of artificial intelligence, machine learning algorithms, sensors, and IoT as a part of solving interdisciplinary problems requiring mechanical engineering know-how. Keeping a balance between theory and hands-on experience, the Department intends to provide its students with a solid foundation in core as well as emerging areas of mechanical engineering by inspiring critical thinking and nurturing problem-solving skills.

The department has active collaborations with AIIMS Jodhpur, General Electric, Thermax, DRDO, ISRO, TCS Innovation Lab, TVS Motor Company to name a few. The department has been attracting various sponsored projects from R&D organizations since its inception.
Welcome To The Department of Materials Engineering
The Department of Materials Engineering at IIT Jodhpur was established in 2017, and the Department is committed to high-quality education and research in the broad area of Materials Engineering. The Department continuously strives for excellence in teaching and research through innovative pedagogy and curriculum, by undertaking interdisciplinary projects, and through active collaborations with industries, R&D labs, and academia. By enabling the students to think independently and equipping them with relevant skill sets, our goal is to encourage the graduates to innovate and address present-day materials challenges to meet the needs of the country.
At present, the Department offers B.Tech., M.Tech., and Ph.D. programs. The Department's teaching and research activities cover four major streams- structural materials, functional materials, computational materials engineering, and process metallurgy. From structural materials to semiconductors, we attempt to understand the processing, composition and structure, properties, and performance of materials for deriving novel, effective, and sustainable alternatives. Currently, efforts are being made to introduce advanced concepts such as smart materials, additive manufacturing, artificial intelligence and machine learning, sensor materials, etc., as a part of solving interdisciplinary problems requiring Materials Engineering knowledge
Head of the Department
The Department of Materials Engineering at IIT Jodhpur is working towards building future generation minds rich in skills and innovation to be the best in the outside world. Faculty Members in the department have expertise in diverse areas of Materials Engineering. They are actively involved in conducting translational research in the fundamental and applied areas of Materials Engineering. The department frequently organizes invited lectures and workshops to share research findings, train students on the state-of-the-art experimental and computational techniques to promote the development of skill sets.
The Department welcomes bright people who aspire to utilize the power of ambitious research and teaching to shape a better future.
1. Materials Design and Processing
2. Advanced Structural and Functional Materials
3. Computational Materials Engineering
4. Extractive and Process Metallurgy
5. Materials Testing and Characterization
Welcome To The Department of Physics
The subject of Physics is inherently a natural science subject based on strong theoretical foundations and experimental findings. The subject closely intersects with almost all the branches of engineering and the current research activities of physics across the world made a huge impact on new, advanced, and emerging technologies. Keeping these facts into consideration, our Department is committed to imparting high-quality education based on a strong academic curriculum comprising elements of theoretical concepts, laboratory experiments, and most importantly hands-on experiments. The graduates of the Department are expected to have deep insight into the domain of Physics together with a strong bent of mind to pursue cutting-edge research and translate it into technology.
We offer a broad range of undergraduate and postgraduate programs. Our†4 Year BS in Physics with specialization†is a technology-oriented science program and offers specialization in physics-based emerging technology domains. The program also has the flexibility to convert into a†5 Year BS + M.Tech. dual degree†course. At the postgraduate level, we have four-degree programs viz.†M.Sc. (2 years), M.Sc.-M.Tech Dual Degree†in Physics and Materials Engineering. The dual degree program also has additional two specializations namely Functional Materials and Computational Materials Engineering. Finally, our†Ph.D. program†empowers scholars to pursue research in various domains.
Research Areas
The department has†a very good blend of highly qualified young and experienced faculty members in the areas of advanced physics. The department is also equipped with a number of thematic laboratories which enable the students to carry out high-end and impactful theoretical and applied research in the following focus areas:
High Energy Physics and Astrophysics
Theoretical research in domains; Flavour physics, Astrophysics, Particle physics, Cosmology, and Dark matter and Dark energy. Experimental research in flavor physics with the Belle II Experiment.

Quantum Physics
Open Quantum Systems, Theoretical and Experimental aspects of Quantum Optics & Quantum Information, Quantum Field Theory, Quantum Statistical Mechanics and Quantum Cosmology.

Condensed Matter and Plasma Physics Group
Experimental and Theoretical Research on Molecular electronics, Organic electronics, Cold Plasma Technologies and applications, Energy Storage, Solar cells, Light emitting diodes, Solar water splitting, Soft Matters, Statistical Physics, Computational Physics, Multiscale Modelling, Phase ordering dynamics, Glasses, Amorphous solids, Polymers and Solid Electrolyte materials, Physics of Living Matter, Active Matter Physics, Functional Materials, Materials Design and Engineering, Nanomagnetism and Multiferroics.

Optics and Photonics
Theoretical and Experimental Research in Nano Photonics, Light in disordered media, Ultrafast Optics, Nonlinear Optics, Topological Singularities, Specially Optical Fibers, Photonic sensors, Time Dynamic systems, Terahertz generation and application, Transient and Steady-state Spectroscopy, Bound state in the continuum, Disorder Photons and Light Matter Interaction and Ceramic materials for high energy laser applications.
Infrastructure
The department is equipped with high-end research equipment which includes SQUID magnetometer, Physical Property Measurement Systems (PPMS), Raman Spectrometer, and Scanning Tunnelling Microscope (STM) besides a host of other advanced characterization equipment which is available at the Centre for Research & Development of Scientific Instruments (CRDSI).

Collaborations
The department is having close collaboration with a number of National and International agencies including DRDO, ISRO, DAE, CSIR, DST, and SERB. Department Faculties also have collaborations with various Institutes of National and International repute, namely TIFR, IIT Bombay, IIT Gandhinagar, IIT BHU, Central University of Rajasthan, University of Montreal, Canada, University of Warsaw Poland, Brookhaven National Laboratory USA, ETH Zurich Switzerland, IMEM Parma Italy, INFN Turino, Italy, CMU Pittsburgh USA, Belle II KEK Japan etc.




Amit Kumar Mishra
Professor Amit Kumar Mishra currently serves as the Head of the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. He holds an M.Sc. in Biotechnology with Honours from Devi Ahilya University, Indore. He pursued his doctoral studies in Neuroscience at the Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience Unit under the mentorship of Professor Nihar Ranjan Jana at the National Brain Research Centre, India. He was awarded the prestigious Max Planck Society Fellowship by Professor Ulrich Hartl (Director of Max Planck Institute, Germany). In addition, he received a highly competitive RIKEN Brain Science Institute Fellowship from the Presidents of RIKEN BSI, Japan, Professor Masao Ito and Professor Shunichi Amari. Prof. Mishra has pioneered a significant conceptual advancement in the field of protein homeostasis by identifying selective E3 ubiquitin ligases as key regulators in cellular quality control mechanisms. His research demonstrates that these ligases act as a first line of defense and ameliorative agents against proteostasis failures, which are central to the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases and imperfect aging. His outstanding contributions to the field have been recognized through numerous prestigious national awards, including honors from INSA, NASI, ISCA, NAMS, IAN, and DBT. He has also received significant international recognition for his work. The New York Academy of Sciences, with members from over 100 countries around the globe, has recognized Amitís Profile for exceptional research in Neurodegeneration. With over 135 high-impact publications in esteemed international journals, Prof. Mishra has established himself as a leading figure in the field of neurobiology. His research not only advances the fundamental understanding of proteostasis mechanisms but also holds significant promise for the development of novel therapeutic strategies targeting neurodegenerative disorders.
Meenu Chhabra
Prof. Meenu Chhabra is a Professor of Bioscience and Bioengineering, and her research is focused on Environmental Biotechnology. Her group work on Algae carbon capture cells, Microbial Fuel Cells, Biomass to Bioenergy, Bioremediation and Biomonitoring. She has a background in Microbiology, with specific training and expertise in enzyme-based bioremediation, bioprocess development, and wastewater treatment. As PI or co-Investigator on several GOI funded grants, She laid the groundwork for the utilizing bio-electrochemical systems for radionuclide bioremediation, algae based microbial capture cells for bioenergy and water treatment, plant microbial fuel cells for domestic wastewater treatment,† Bioremediation of xenobiotics and heavy metals and Point-of-Use sensors for BOD and coliforms.† In addition, She successfully administered the projects, collaborated with other researchers, and produced several peer-reviewed publications from each project. Currently, the group is discussing and demonstrating the work to Industry stakeholders for bench to field applications of our work.† In summary, the lab has expertise, leadership, training, and motivation necessary to successfully carry out work on carbon neutrality, zero waste, zero water, and circular bioeconomy.
Email:meenuchhabra@iitj.ac.in; Phone: +91-291-2801205
Mitali Mukerji
Dr. Mitali Mukerji, PhD, FASc, FNASc†is a Professor in the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur and is affiliated with the School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science (AIDE) and Centre for Emerging Technologies for Sustainable Development. . She earned her PhD in microbial molecular genetics from the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore in 1997.† Prior to joining IIT Jodhpur in 2021, she served as Chief Scientist at the CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology (IGIB), New Delhi, where she led the Genomics and Molecular Medicine department and CSIRís Ayurgenomics unit TRISUTRA. She has contributed to research† human genomics with a focus on rare diseases and functional genomics of Alu repeats, biomarker discovery for disease susceptibility, environmental adaptations, and tracing mutational histories. She pioneered the field of Ayurgenomics, that integrates Ayurveda with modern genomics for personalized and integrative medicine, and was the convenor of† the Indian Genome Variation Consortium (IGVC), which provided the first comprehensive genetic landscape of Indian populations.
At IIT Jodhpur, Dr. Mukerji leads two major transdisciplinary initiatives:†Thar DESIGNS, which explores human adaptation and ecosystem phenomics in the Thar Desert using multi-omic technologies including† population genomics, citizen science and ecology; and AYURTECH Centre of Excellence†Centre of Excellence in Integrative Precision Health at AIDE school†that builds AI enabled frameworks for early, actionable health interventions. through integration of principles and practices of Ayurveda with genomics and engineering sciences † for† evidence-based solutions.††
Dr. Mukerjiís contributions have been recognized with several prestigious honors, including the†Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Award†in Medical Sciences, election as Fellow of the†Indian Academy of Sciences†and the†National Academy of Sciences, India, DBT Young Women scientist award, the†VASVIK Award for Women Scientists, and Global†WomenLift Health fellow.
†
Surajit Ghosh
Surajit Ghosh is a Professor in the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering at Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India. He is leading his group with a current research focus on the areas of Chemical Neuroscience, Chemical Biology and Development of Biophysical Platform/Biosensor.†
He earned his Bachelorís and Masterís degree in Chemistry from University of Calcutta. In 2008, he received his PhD in Chemistry from IIT Kanpur. After completing his Ph. D., he received postdoctoral fellowship at Cell Biology and Biophysics Division of European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany, where he worked on organization of microtubule and molecular motor proteins. Prior to Joining at IIT Jodhpur, he worked at CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology Kolkata as Principal Scientist.
Sushmita Jha
Sushmita Jha is a Professor in the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. During her PhD at the Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Prof Jha elucidated a novel pathway for inflammation and demyelination in the brain.† She pursued Postdoctoral research at the UNC Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Care (USA), characterising cellular and molecular mechanisms of demyelination in Multiple Sclerosis.†
Subsequently, Prof Jha joined IIT Jodhpur in 2012. At IIT Jodhpur, she established the Inflammation Immunity and Tumour Biology Lab. This lab focuses on understanding innate immunity, inflammation, and tumour biology utilising cellular and molecular 3-Dimensional (3D) models such as patient-derived organoids and 3D tunable spheroids to study brain tumours and breast cancer pathophysiology as well as normal physiology. Prof Jha's laboratory has been funded by the Department of Biotechnology, International Brain Research Organization (IBRO), Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MEITy), SERB, and BRNS (DAE).†
Prof Jha is the recipient of the IITJ Research Excellence Award 2024, IBRO Diversity grant 2023, ISNO Presidentís Award for Outstanding Work in Neuro-Oncology by the Indian Society for Neuro-Oncology (2022), The Kusum Sharma Award for a Young Woman Scientist awarded by the Indian Academy of Biomedical Sciences (2021), Young scientist Award, (2014-2017) Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), and the Hulka Innovatorís Award (2008) Centre for womenís health research at University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, USA.
Prof Jha is the founding Head of the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering at IITJ and has been heading the joint programs in medical technologies between IITJ and AIIMSJ since 2020, as well as the MedTech Centre at IITJ.†
Email:sushmitajha@iitj.ac.in, Phone: +91-291-280-1204
Indranil Banerjee
Dr. Indranil Banerjee is an associate professor in the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur. Dr. Banerjee has extensive research experience in tissue engineering, regenerative medicine, biomaterials, therapeutic delivery systems and biomicrofludics. Presently, his lab is working on AI-guided 3D bioprinted diseses model for in vitro drug screening, 3D printed craniofacial implants, NIR-responsive phototherapeutics for chronic wound healing, and Proangiogenic 2D biomaterials.††
Dr. Banerjee has an interdisciplinary academic and research background. He did his double bachelor's (B.Sc in† Chemistry (Hons) and B.Tech in Chemical Technology) and Master's (M.Tech. in Pharmaceutical and Fine Chemical Technology) from the University of Calcutta. Later, he pursued his PhD in Biotechnology from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. He started his academic career as an assistant professor in the Department of Biotechnology and Medical Engineering, National Institute of Technology Rourkela. He has authored around 100 research articles and book chapters and edited several books. He received the Institute Award for Research Excellence -2022; Senior Researcher Award (Engineering) at IIT Jodhpur. Dr. Banerjee is closely engaged with the start-up ecosystem and is associated with 2 deep-tech start-ups.†
Email:†indranil@iitj.ac.in† † Phone: 0291-280-1214
Neha Jain
Neha is an Associate Professor at the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur. Her lab is interested in understanding the cross-talk between bacterial and human amyloids and their consequences on the progression of human neurodegenerative diseases. Dr. Jain did an MSc in Industrial Microbiology at the University of Rajasthan, Jaipur, and a PhD in Molecular Biophysics at the Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Mohali (IISER Mohali). Following her PhD, she joined Prof. Matthew Chapman at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, as a postdoctoral research fellow. She is a recipient of the Early Career Research Award, ASM-IUSSTF Visiting Fellowship, IBRO Collaborative Research grant, and International Mobility grant. In 2024, she was selected as an EMBO Global Investigator and an INSA Young Associate. She has been appointed as a member of the Early Career Review Board in the Journal of Biological Chemistry. Neha is very active in science outreach and has conducted several science awareness workshops in rural areas of Rajasthan through IndiaBioscience Outreach Grant Awards and IBRO Diversity grant. Her research will contribute to a better understanding of the amyloid disease progression and will open avenues for targeted drug delivery in the future.
Email: njain@iitj.ac.in;
Phone: +91-291-2801210
About
Education:
Dr. Yadav obtained his first academic degree in 2009 as Bachelor of Engineering in Biotechnology from Panjab University, Chandigarh, India. He then moved to Germany, where he spent nearly eight years pursuing advanced studies. In 2012, he completed his Master of Science in Life Science Informatics from the University of Bonn, Germany. Following this, he obtained his Doctoral Degree in Statistical Genomics from the University of Kiel, Germany, in 2015, with funding from the German Research Foundation (DFG).
Professional career:
Since December 2024, Dr. Yadav has been working as an Associate Professor in the Bioscience & Bioengineering Department at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Jodhpur. Prior to this, from June 2019 to December 2024, he served as an Assistant Professor at IIT Jodhpur. He is also an affiliated faculty member at the School of Artificial Intelligence & Data Science at IIT Jodhpur. Before joining IIT Jodhpur, Dr. Yadav worked as a Senior Data Scientist at Reliance Jio, Hyderabad, India, and as a Research Scientist at DuPont, Hyderabad, India. From November 2016 to July 2018, he worked as a Postdoctoral Scientist at the renowned German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) in Heidelberg, Germany. Additionally, in 2012, he served as a Research Assistant at the Helmholtz Research Center, Munich, Germany.
Research work:
Dr. Yadav's primary research interests include statistical genetics, personalized healthcare, multi-omics, and the application of deep learning in multi-omics data analysis. With over 10 years of experience in genome-wide gene-environment interaction studies, method development, and integrated multi-omics data analysis, he has made significant contributions to these fields. He is currently serving as the Principal Investigator (PI) for the Genome India project, funded by the Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Government of India, where he has been actively involved in various aspects of the analysis of Indian genomes, with a particular focus on gene-environment interactions. Additionally, he is leading an ICMR Intermediate Project aimed at identifying gene-environment and polygenic risk score-environment interactions in the Indian population to improve risk stratification for prediabetes and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Dr. Yadav has extensive experience in developing statistical methods for gene-environment interaction studies. During his time at DKFZ, he worked on drawing statistical inferences from multiple myeloma cancer datasets collected from hospitals in Germany and the UK. At the Helmholtz Center, Munich, he contributed to the development of machine learning algorithms for quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) analysis. His research has been published in several peer-reviewed international journals, and he has contributed to numerous international conferences, seminars, and workshops. Dr. Yadav also serves as an invited review editor for the International Journal of Diabetes in Developing Countries and Frontiers in Genetics.
Awards & honours:
Dr. Yadav has received several prestigious awards and fellowships throughout his career. He was awarded an undergraduate scholarship from Panjab University to pursue his Bachelor of Engineering degree. He was also granted the German Research Foundation (DFG) Fellowship to complete his doctoral studies and later received the Deutsche Krebshilfe Postdoctoral Fellowship. In 2018, Dr. Yadav was honored with the INSPIRE Faculty Award by the Indian National Science Academy (INSA). The following year, in 2019, he received the ìReturning Expertî Award from the German Development Cooperation (GIZ). In 2023, he was awarded a Travel Award by the Human Cell Atlas (HCA) to present his research at the HCA Asia meeting. That same year, his project was selected for the Scientific High-Level Visiting Fellowship (SSHN) by the French Institute in India, Embassy of France. Outside of his academic achievements, Dr. Yadav is also passionate about sports. In 2023, he earned a Gold Medal in Volleyball as the team captain at the Inter-IIT Staff Sports Meet held at IIT Gandhinagar. In 2025, Dr. Yadav was selected as a Senior Individual Member of the Indian National Academy of Engineering (INAE).
Priyanka Singh
Dr. Priyanka Singh†is an Associate Professor in the Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur, where her research delves into the mechanisms of centrosome organization and cell proliferation, with a strong emphasis on cancer therapeutics. Combining forward and reverse drug discovery strategies, her lab seeks to identify novel anti-cancer molecules while exploring the diagnostic and therapeutic potential of centrosomes in human diseases.
Dr. Singh completed her B.Sc. in Microbiology (Honours) from the University of Delhi, followed by an M.Sc. in Biotechnology from Jawaharlal Nehru University, and a Ph.D. from the University of Muenster, Germany.
Before joining IIT Jodhpur, she conducted postdoctoral research as an EMBO Long-Term Fellow at the Biozentrum, Basel (Switzerland) and as an Alexander von Humboldt Fellow at the Max Planck Institute, Dortmund (Germany). Her contributions to biomedical research have been recognized through prestigious awards, including the INYAS-2025 membership, BRNS Young Scientist Research Award (2021), and DBT-Har Gobind Khorana Innovative Young Biotechnologist Award (2019). Through her interdisciplinary approach, Dr. Singh aims to bridge fundamental discoveries with translational applications in cancer therapy.
†
Raviraj Vankayala
Dr. Raviraj Vankayala is an Associate Professor in the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India, where his research involves the development of multifunctional nanostructures for diagnostic and therapeutic applications in tackling various diseases. Dr. Vankayala completed his† B. Sc and M. Sc in Chemistry from Andhra University, Visakhapatnam. He earned his Ph.D. degree in Chemistry from National Tsing Hua University (2012), Taiwan and his postdoctoral studies were performed at National Tsing Hua University (2015) and University of California Riverside (2017), USA. He worked as a Chief Technology Officer at Radoptics LLC (2017-2019) for the development of biomimetic nanoconstructs for imaging and therapeutic applications of cancer and vascular diseases. He has secured an Outstanding Researcher Award for his contributions in the field of Nanobiotechnology by IIT Jodhpur for the year 2021. He also secured the prestigious DBT Ramalingaswami biomedical fellowship for the year 2018-2019. He served as a Guest Editor for various special issues in the MDPI and Frontiers journals. He is currently serving as an Associate Editor for Frontiers in Drug Delivery journal and as an editorial board member for the Scientific Reports (Nature Publishing Group) and Particle (John Wiley & Sons) journals. He has secured the prestigious 2024 Rising Stars in Biological, Medicinal, and Pharmaceutical Chemistry by the American Chemical Society.
Email: rvankayala@iitj.ac.in;
Phone: +91-291-2801215
Shankar Manoharan
Dr. Shankar Manoharan is an Associate Professor in the Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur. He is passionate about microbes, microbial communities and their workings. He currently leads the Microbial Physiology Laboratory at IIT Jodhpur. Shankar holds a Masters degree in Genomics and a Ph.D. in Microbiology from Madurai Kamaraj University. In his Ph.D. work on molecular plant microbe interactions, he identified a new cross-Kingdom signaling mechanism, by which plants can control bacterial numbers in the rhizosphere. He then pursued postdoctoral training at the University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, where he identified new regulatory networks controlling the expression of key virulence factors in streptococci. In 2017 he was awarded the DBT/Wellcome Trust India Alliance's Early Career Fellowship and joined IIT Jodhpur. His group has since worked on the hospital-acquired pathogen†Klebsiella pneumoniae†to unravel new virulence mechanisms and regulatory layers controlling virulence. As part of a Team Science Grant funded by the DBT/Wellcome Trust India Alliance, Shankar's group is also studying the effect of food system changes on the gut microbiota of vulnerable tribal populations in India. In addition, his group is also surveying the microbiota of biocrusts, unique communities that engineer arid zone ecosystems with the aim of conserving,restoring, and tapping into the biosynthetic potential of these important desert communities. Apart from research, Shankar is passionate about teaching and enjoys the teaching-learning process. In 2022, he was conferred with the Dr. Vandana Sharma memorial award for innovation in teaching. He was also recognized with the Illustrious Alumnus award by his Alma mater, Thiagarajar College of Arts & Sciences, Madurai.
Sudipta Bhattacharyya
Dr. Sudipta Bhattacharyya is an Associate professor in the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. Dr. Bhattacharyyaís research is focused on unravelling the molecular intricacies of host-pathogen interactions and drug resistance.
Dr. Bhattacharyya has completed his B.Sc in Microbiology (Honours) from Calcutta University, followed by an M.Sc in Microbiology and Microbial Technology from Kalyani University. He has earned Ph.D. in Biochemistry and Structural Biology from Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur. After completion of his PhD degree, Dr. Bhattacharyya completed his post-doctoral research tenures in Colorado State University, USA, University of Texas, USA and University of Melbourne, Australia. During his PhD and post-doctoral tenures, he has been extensively employed the state-of-the-art tools and techniques of Structural Biology, Enzyme Chemistry and Drug Designing. His postdoctoral research for the first time, excavated the ancestral origin of the modern nucleosome, which is the fundamental repeating unit of eukaryotic chromosomes. Moreover, his postdoctoral research works also shed light on the molecular basis of prokaryotic non-homologus end joining based dsDNA repair mechanism and the novel molecular conformation of HIV-I surface glycoprotein during cell entry and antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity.††
At IIT Jodhpur, Dr. Bhattacharyyaís research group is principally engaged in structure-guided rational drug discovery against the dreaded ESKAPE pathogens, focusing on natural products and leveraging pharmacophore identification for the rational discovery of therapeutic leads. With a prolific academic career, Dr. Bhattacharyya has so far published more than 35 research papers in peer-reviewed international journals including the top tier journals in the field like Science, Cell Host & Microbe, PNAS etc., contributed more than 35 Protein Data Bank (PDB) and Electron Microscopy Data Bank (EMDB) -based publications, and applied for 4 Indian patents. His contributions to the scientific community extend beyond research as an active member of the American Chemical Society, the Royal Society of Biology, CCP4 Bulletin Board and Phenix Bulletin Board. He is committed to foster innovation in structure guided drug discovery by inspiring the next generation of researchers in the field.
†
Ayan Sadhukhan
Dr. Ayan Sadhukhan is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur. His research focuses on plant functional genomics, particularly mechanisms of abiotic stress tolerance in plants. He employs model systems like†Arabidopsis thaliana†and extremophyte species from the Thar desert to explore genetic and epigenetic adaptations to environmental stressors.
He earned his B.Tech in Biotechnology from West Bengal University of Technology (2008) and Ph.D. in Bioscience and Bioengineering from IIT Guwahati (2015).†
Prior to joining IIT Jodhpur, he was an Assistant Professor at the Koneru Lakshmaiah Education Foundation (2021-2022). He† conducted† postdoctoral research in Japan (Gifu University; 2015-2019) and USA (University of Florida; 2019-2020). He received the JSPS postdoctoral fellowship in 2016. His work integrates high-throughput genomic tools, including genome-wide association studies (GWAS), transcriptomics, and genome editing, to identify key genes and pathways involved in plant stress responses.
Email:†ayansadhukhan@iitj.ac.in.
About
I am an†Associate Professor†in the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur. I have also served as a Research Assistant Professor at the Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, USA from 2019 to 2022. I am a recipient of Pelotonia Postdoctoral Fellowship, The Ohio State University, USA.†
The focus of my research group is to develop diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers and drug targets for lung cancer using multi-omics approaches. We also perform drug testing in clinically relevant patient-derived xenografts in humanized mouse models and tumor organoids.†
In one of our projects, we are developing induced-Pluripotent Stem Cells (iPSCs)-derived lung organoids for studying the molecular mechanisms of silica dust-induced Silicosis disease, which is an occupational hazard for sandstone miners in the local area.
We also perform drug repurposing studies to identify drug combinations capable of improving the efficacy of existing chemotherapies and immunotherapies for drug-resistant lung cancer patients. My previous research showed that tumor-associated macrophages can be activated against breast and lung cancers. This research has potential to develop novel immune-based therapies for cancer patients. The long term goal of my research is to improve the health status of lung cancer and Silicosis patients.
Sucharita Dey
Dr. Sucharita Dey is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur. She completed her PhD in Computational Structural Biology from Bose Institute, Kolkata, in 2013, and postdoctoral training from Cancer Science Institute Singapore and Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel, from 2013 to 2021. She is a recipient of the Ramalingaswami fellowship and research grant 2021 from DBT India.
†She works in structural bioinformatics, where her research group broadly focuses on understanding the mechanisms underlying protein-protein interactions in the living cell. Her research group focuses explicitly on studying genetic variations among diverse populations and, hence, the mutational robustness of proteins. The aim is to understand disease mechanisms in the context of protein structure (specifically protein quaternary structure) variation. Her research interests also include studying the diversity and unveiling novel principles of protein-protein interactions, protein oligomerization and evolution, protein Quaternary structure prediction, identifying structural determinants of inter-subunit communication (Allostery), and designing molecules that act through an allosteric transition. Her group uses diverse computational methods to do structural analysis of bulk data. This ëbig dataí analysis on structural biology is anticipated to create a new field of ëstructuromicsí (bridging proteomics and interactomics with structural data), and her group at IIT Jodhpur would be actively contributing to it.
Email: sdey@iitj.ac.in. Phone: 0291-280-1218
About
I am an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mathematics, IIT Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India. I have completed my Ph.D. from IIT Delhi in the year 2018. Prior to this, I mastered in Mathematics and Computing from the Department of Mathematics, IIT Guwahati in 2014.† My Bachelor's degree is from Lady Brabourne College, University of Calcutta in 2012. My research area of specialisation is "Analysis of Partial Differential Equations".
About
I am currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mathematics, IIT Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India. Before joining IIT Jodhpur, I was a postdoctoral fellow at the Department of Computer Science and Engineering of the University of Quebec in Outaouais, Canada under the supervision of Prof. Andrzej Pelc. I also worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Ottawa, Canada under the supervision of Prof. Paola Flocchini of University of Ottawa and Prof. Nicola Santoro of Carleton University, Canada. 


I earned my PhD from the Advanced Computing and Microelectronics Unit of Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata. My Ph.D. supervisor was Prof. Krishnendu Mukhopadhyaya. Research Interests: My primary research interests lie in the areas of distributed systems and algorithms. In particular, I am interested in the following areas: Distributed algorithms for Swarm Robots and Autonomous Multi-Agent systems. Internet of Robotic Things (IoRT) and Autonomous Mobile Robotic Sensors. Distributed Network algorithms. 
Security in Distributed Computing
About
Dr. Shaily Verma is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mathematics at IIT Jodhpur. Before joining IIT Jodhpur, she was a postdoctoral researcher at the Hasso Plattner Institute (HPI), Germany. Prior to that, she was a postdoctoral researcher at the Institute of Mathematical Sciences (IMSc), Chennai. She earned her Ph.D. in Mathematics in 2020 from IIT Delhi under the supervision of Prof. B. S. Panda. Dr. Verma's research interests lie in graph algorithms and parameterized complexity, with a focus on the design and analysis of efficient algorithms for hard combinatorial problems. She has published her research in leading international conferences and journals in theoretical computer science and algorithms, and continues to explore problems at the intersection of graph theory, algorithms, and computational complexity.
About me
I am currently working as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mathematics, IIT Jodhpur. I obtained my Ph.D. in Mathematics from IISc Bangalore in 2022. After completing Ph.D., I pursued postdoctoral research at several institutes: first at Harish-Chandra Research Institute (HRI), Prayagraj; then at the University of Lille, France, for two years; and most recently at TIFR-CAM, Bangalore, for one year, before joining IIT Jodhpur.
My area of expertise is Several complex variables, with current research interests including the theory of singular holomorphic foliations on complex manifolds, the reduced Bergman kernel for planar domains, and curvature properties of the Grauert metrics.
Among some notable achievements, I received the Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Fellowship (SPMF) from CSIR in 2018 for my doctoral research. In 2019, I was awarded the Professor P. L. Bhatnagar Gold Medal for the best Integrated Ph.D. student in the Division of Physical and Mathematical Sciences at IISc Bangalore. Recently, in 2025, I have been awarded the DST INSPIRE Faculty Fellowship.
About
Dr. Rakesh Pawar is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mathematics at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, a position he has held since December 2025. He received his Ph.D. in Mathematics from the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, in September 2017. Before this, he completed his M.Sc. in Mathematics from the Indian Institute of Technology Bombay from 2010ñ2012.
Following his Ph.D., Dr. Pawar held several postdoctoral positions. He was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany, from October 2017 to September 2018. He subsequently held a Postdoctoral position at IISER Mohali (2019-2021) and an NBHM postdoctoral fellowship at IISER Pune (2021-2023). He was a postdoc at …cole Normale SupÈrieure de Lyon, France (September 2023-August 2024). He was a Visiting Scientist at HRI Prayagaraj (Sept 2024-July 2025) and then a Visiting Assistant Professor at Kerala School of Mathematics, Kerala (August 2025-December 2025).
His area of research is Algebraic Geometry, and his interests lie in Algebraic cycles, Motives, Milnor-(Witt) K-theory, the applications of homotopical methods in Algebraic Geometry, and commutative algebra.
About
Dr. Rajat Gupta is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mathematics at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, a position he has held since December 2025. He received his Ph.D. in Mathematics from the Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar in July 2022. Prior to this, he completed his M.Sc. in Mathematics from the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur during 2013ñ2015.

Following his Ph.D., Dr. Gupta held several postdoctoral positions. He was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Institute of Mathematics, Academia Sinica, Taiwan, from May to December 2022. He subsequently held positions at the University of Texas at Tyler (January 2023 -- August 2024) under Professor Madeline Dawsey, the University of Maine (September 2024 -- August 2025), and worked under the mentorship of Professor Kathrin Bringmann at the University of Cologne, Germany, until December 2025.

His research interests lie in number theory, including analytic number theory, the theory of partitions, modular forms, harmonic Maass forms,†q-series, and special functions.

Dr. Gupta is interested in supervising motivated summer interns and Ph.D. students, and in mentoring postdoctoral researchers. Prospective candidates are encouraged to contact him via his institute email.
About
Dr. Moumita Mandal is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mathematics at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. She earned her Ph.D. and M.Sc. in Mathematics from IIT Kharagpur, following a B.Sc. (Hons.) in Mathematics from Bankura Christian College. Her research specializes in Numerical Functional Analysis, particularly in approximation methods for integral and integro-differential equations, fixed point theory, and operator theory.
With teaching experience spanning IIT Jodhpur and VIT University, she has offered a wide range of undergraduate and postgraduate courses, including Numerical Analysis, Functional Analysis, and Scientific Computations. She has authored over 15 journal articles in reputed international journals and contributed to several conferences and workshops.
Dr. Mandal has been recognized with prestigious fellowships and grants, including a Postdoctoral Fellowship from NBHM and multiple research grants from NBHM and IIT Jodhpur. She serves as a reviewer for Mathematical Reviews and holds memberships in several mathematical societies such as AMS, RMS, and IMS. She is also on the editorial board of journals in mathematics and computational sciences.

Her supervision includes guiding multiple masterís and doctoral students, with active research projects funded by Indian government agencies.
About
Dr. Md Abu Talhamainuddin Ansary is an Assistant Professor of Mathematics at IIT Jodhpur. He earned his M. sc. as well as Ph.D. from IIT Kharagpur. He did his postdoc in the department of economic sciences, IIT Kanpur form June 2019 to March 2021. He served as an Assistant Professor in VIT Bhopal prior to join IIT Jodhpur in 2021. 


His research primarily focuses on multi-objective optimization, interval analysis etc.. 
Among notable achievements, he was awarded Prof. Probodh Chandra Sanyal award for the best project work in 2nd Year M. Sc. in Mathematics, IIT Kharagpur in 2012.
About
Dr. Kriti Goel joined the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur as an Assistant Professor in December 2025. She received her Ph.D. in Mathematics from the Indian Institute of Technology Bombay in August 2020 under the supervision of Dr. Jugal K. Verma. Dr. Goel has held several postdoctoral positions since. She was an Early Career Fellow at the Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, India (October 2020 - October 2021), working with Dr. Indranath Sengupta. She received the Fulbright-Nehru Postdoctoral Research Fellowship to attend the University of Utah, USA (January 2022 - January 2023) and work with Dr. Anurag Singh. It was followed by a 2-year position in the Singularity Theory and Algebraic Geometry group at the Basque Center for Applied Mathematics, Spain. Before joining IIT Jodhpur, she was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Missouri-Columbia, USA (August 2025 - December 2025), working with Hema Srinivasan.
Her research interests include the study of the local theory of singularities from an algebraic viewpoint, with emphasis on numerical invariants of singularities, in particular, multiplicity theory and positive characteristic methods.
About
Kuntal Som is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mathematics at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. He received his Ph.D. from the Indian Institute of Technology Madras and worked as a Postdoctoral Fellow in the Department of Economic Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur. His primary research interests is broadly in mathematical optimization theory and specilaizing in set-valued optimization and bilevel Programming. Other interest includes, game theory, quantum information theory, but mainly from the perspective of optimization. 
About
Dr. Bimal Mandal is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mathematics at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. His research interests include cryptographic Boolean functions and cryptanalysis of block and stream ciphers. He has published several research papers in reputed journals and conferences in the area of cryptography. His research contributes to the analysis and characterization of the basic building of symmetric key cryptosystems.
Dr. Mandal completed his Master of Science degree in Mathematics from Jadavpur University in 2012 and PhD degree from Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee in 2018.†
Before joining IIT Jodhpur in July 2022, he worked as an Assistant Professor in Institute for Advancing Intelligence (IAI) at TCG Centres for Research and Education in Science and Technology (TCG CREST), Kolkata. He worked as a visiting scientist in the R C Bose Centre for Cryptology and Security, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, and as a research associate in the Department of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Madras. He worked as a postdoctoral fellow in the Cryptology, Arithmetic: Algebraic Methods for Better Algorithms (CARAMBA) team, National Institute for Research in Computer Science and Automation (INRIA), France for more than a year, and in the Department of Computer Sciences and Networks (INFRES), Telecom Paris, France for one year.
About
Dr. Nil Kamal Hazra is currently working as an Associate Professor at IIT Jodhpur. He obtained† his Ph.D. degree in Reliability Theory from IISER Kolkata. After completion of his PhD, he joined as a Visiting Scientist at ISI Kolkata. Then, he moved to South Africa to pursue his postdoctoral research career, and he joined as a Claude Leon Postdoctoral Fellow in the Dept. of Mathematical Statistics at University of Free State, Bloemfontein. Then he started his professional career as an Assistant Professor in the Dept. of Mathematics at IIITDM Kancheepuram, Chennai. After spending one year at IIITDM Kancheepuram,† he moved to IIT Jodhpur where he is currently working in the Dept. of Mathematics.
His current research interest includes Reliability Theory, Applied Probability, Robust Statistical Inference, Sequential Data Analysis and Time Series Analysis.
He has been appointed as an Associate Editor in leading statistical journals, namely, Opsearch, Communications in Statistics-Theory and Methods, Communications in Statistics-Simulations and Computations, and Communications in Statistics- Case Studies and Data Analysis.
About
Dilpreet Kaur is an Associate Professor in the Department of Mathematics at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur. Her academic journey includes a PhD in Mathematics from IISER Mohali, followed by postdoctoral fellowships at IISER Pune under the NBHM and SERB National Post Doctoral Fellowships. She was awarded a Gold Medal for securing the first position in her MSc Mathematics program at Panjab University in 2009. She has been serving as a faculty member at IIT Jodhpur since 2019.
She has taught a wide range of mathematics courses, including Real Analysis, Number Theory, Abstract Algebra, Linear Algebra, Optimization, and specialized subjects like Group Theory for Machine Learning and Representations of Finite Groups. She is also teaching regularly in national level schools sponsored by National center of Mathematics (NCM) and Indian Women and Mathematics (IWM). She has also organized workshops and academic programs, such as the Annual Foundation School-I (2022), Women in Maths: Progress and Challenges (2022), and the Online SageMath Workshop (2021).†
In research, Dr. Kaur has made significant contributions to algebra, particularly in the areas of finite groups, conjugacy classes and representations of finite groups, quadratic forms,† quandles and quandle rings. She is the Principal Investigator (PI) of a project titled "Computations in Wreath Product", funded by the Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) under the MATRICS scheme.
About
Dr. Kirankumar Hiremath is an Professor of Mathematics at IIT Jodhpur. He is an applied mathematician working in wave-matter interactions, mathematical physics, scientific computations, and applied analysis. His specialization is mathematical optics-photonics and the design of efficient methods to solve real life problems. He did his post-graduation from IIT Bombay and PhD from the University of Twente (The Netherlands). After that, he did his post-doc at Optoelectronics Center, University of North Carolina at Charlotte (USA), and Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (Germany). He worked at Zuse Institute Berlin (Germany). Since 2012, he has been with IIT Jodhpur. He is also a member of the Interdisciplinary Research Group on Quantum Information. His mathematical work on bent waveguides, microresonators, and coupled mode theory is very well received.
About
Gaurav Bhatnagar is a Professor in the Department of Mathematics at Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur since June 2023. He was an Associate Professor and Assistant Professor in the same Department from September 2013 onward. Prior to joining IIT Jodhpur, Dr. Bhatnagar spent four years as a Post-doctoral Research Associate in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at University of Windsor, Canada from September 2009 to August 2013. Dr. Bhatnagar received his PhD in interdisciplinary area of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science and an MSc in Applied Mathematics from the Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, India, in 2010 and 2005, respectively. He is also the Project Director of TIH iHub Drishti, a Section 8 Not-for-profit Organisation, promoted by and at IIT Jodhpur established under National Mission on Interdisciplinary Cyber Physical Systems (NM-ICPS) of the Government of India. His research interests lie in the broad area of wavelet and fractional transform theory, with applications in multimedia security, digital watermarking and encryption techniques, hashing protocols, biometrics, image analysis, segmentation and completion. Dr. Bhatnagar is the author of over 80 scholarly publications in peer reviewed technical journals and conference proceedings. He was recently listed under researchers in Artificial Intelligence & Image Processing in the newly released Stanford University listing of the top 2% of researchers globally. He is a member of several professional bodies, including IEEE, ACM, SIAM and AMS. He is associated with several journals as the technical committee member and has been regularly associated with international conferences/workshops in various roles such as Program Chair, Area Chair, Session Chair and TPC Member.
About:
Mayank Vatsa is a Professor at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur, a Fellow of IEEE and IAPR, and a member of the National Academy of AI (USA). His research focuses on Artificial Intelligence, with an emphasis on Generative AI, Responsible AI, computer vision, and biometrics. He is a recipient of India's prestigious Swarnajayanti Fellowship and the IEEE Meritorious Service Award (2023). He serves as Co-Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE Transactions on Biometrics, Behavior, and Identity Science, a journal he led the efforts to establish during his tenure as Vice President of the IEEE Biometrics Council. He has also held senior roles at premier conferences like AAAI, CVPR, ICCV, IJCB, and FG. Dr. Vatsa has contributed in several of India's key technology initiatives, contributing to UIDAI (Aadhaar) standards, DigiYatra, the NITI Aayog 'Responsible AI for All' policy, national biometric standards, and the formation of the Technology Innovation Hub at IIT Jodhpur.
About
?D?r. Singh is a Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur. She earned her Ph.D. in Computer Science from West Virginia University, USA. She is a globally recognized leader in artificial intelligence and machine learning, with a focus on pattern recognition, biometrics, medical image analysis, and Responsible AI. Her contributions to the field have been recognized with the highest distinctions, including being named a Fellow of the IEEE, IAPR, and Indian National Academy of Engineering (INAE). She is also an ACM Distinguished Member and a member of the National Academy of AI (USA). A prolific researcher, Prof. Singh has authored over 400 publications in top-tier venues, which have garnered more than 16,200 citations (h index: 71). Her research program has attracted external grants exceeding Rs. 56 crores. She holds editorial leadership roles, serving as the Founding Co-Editor-in-Chief of ACM AI Letters and the Associate Editor-in-Chief of the prestigious Pattern Recognition Journal. Prof. Singh's work has demonstrated profound real-world impact. Her face recognition technology was instrumental in the challenging task of identifying victims of the Balasore train accident, while her deepfake detection systems were deployed to ?p?revent the? spread of misinformation ?i?n India's 2024 general elections. Her contributions have been honored with numerous awards, including the Nasscom AI Gamechangers Award and the Facebook Award for Ethics in AI. She has supervised 14 Ph.D. students to graduation (14 ongoing PhDs) and guided over 200 M.Tech and B.Tech students. She has a strong record of service to the academic community, notably serving as the Program Committee Chair for CVPR 2022, becoming the first researcher from India to hold this position in the conference's 40-year history. She regularly serves in leadership roles for premier conferences such as ICCV, ECCV, AAAI, and major biometrics venues.
About:
Dr. Debasis Das is currently working as an Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering and Associate Faculty at the School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science (AIDE), as well as Coordinator of IoT and Applications (Inter-disciplinary Research Platform (IDRP) at Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India. His research interests include Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks (VANETs), Blockchain, the Internet of Things (IoT), Machine Learning (ML), Artificial Intelligence (AI), and Quantum Technology. Dr. Das published 170 research papers in top international journals( Like IEEE Transactions, ACM Transactions, etc) and top B/A/A* Conferences. Dr. Das has 23 sponsored projects and 2 consultancy projects to his credit. He has been awarded the Early Career Research (ECR) Award, BRICS Young Scientist Award, Young Researcher Award-2024, DST-NSF Project Award 2025, NSTC Research Project Award 2025 from Science & Engineering Research Board (SERB), Department of Science & Technology (DST), MoE, NSF, and NSTC, respectively. He has many research collaborations with premier institutions in India and different universities across the globe. He has been engaged in different academic activities inside and outside the Institute. He has supervised 10 Ph.D. students, and 10 are currently pursuing their theses. He has also supervised more than 50 M.E./M.Tech. thesis. He is a senior member of IEEE and VTS and a professional member of ACM.
About:
Dr. Banerjee is curently working as an Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering of IIT Jodhpur. His research interests are broadly in the areas of high performance computing, big data analytics, accelerated computing, and computer architectures. Previously he was a post-doctoral researcher at the Network Based Computing Laboratory of The Ohio State University where he worked under the mentorship of Prof. Dhabaleswar K. Panda. Before that, he completed my Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) from International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad in 2014 where he worked under the guidance of Dr. Kishore Kothapalli. He was a part of the Center for Security, Theory, and Algorithmic Research (CSTAR) laboratory. His PhD research was broadly in High Performance Computing where he worked towards developing novel algorithms and implementations for heterogeneous computing platforms that could utilise multiple multi-core and many-core processors at the same time leading to better performance and higher system efficiency.
About
Anand Mishra serves as a faculty member in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering. He leads the Vision, Language, and Learning Group (VL2G) at IIT Jodhpur, which focuses on problems at the intersection of†vision and language. Specifically, the group is focusing on video understanding, efficient vision and language models and multilinguality. Anand has made significant contributions to the field through influential resources and systems, including the†IIIT-5K†and†OCR-VQA†datasets, as well as†IndicPhotoOCR, an open-source OCR system for Indian language text in natural images. His research group has received support through various industry and government of India grants, including Microsoft Academic Partnership Grant (2021 and 2023), MeitY Grant on National Language Translation Mission, a research grant from HealthcareNLP, a Gift Grant from Accenture, and a Start-up Research Grant from SERB, Govt. of India. Anand is an active reviewer for top-tier computer vision, language and AI venues, and his reviewing contributions have been recognized with†Outstanding Reviewer Awards at ICCV 2021 and CVPR 2023.†He served as†Program Co-Chair for ICVGIP 2025†and is currently serving as an†Area Chair for CVPR 2026 and ECCV 2026.
About:
Angshuman Paul is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Computer Science & Engineering at IIT Jodhpur. His research primarily focuses on the development of deep learning techniques for the synthesis and analysis of medical images, aiming to advance affordable healthcare solutions. Prior to joining IIT Jodhpur, he served as a postdoctoral fellow at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), USA.
About
Since March 2025, Dr Jain is an assistant professor at the CSE department of IIT Jodhpur. In June 2025, Dr Jain, recevied DST INSPIRE Faculty Fellowship Grant for five years. Before joining academics, he was in industrial research at Hitachi Rail, Berlin for little over two years. There Dr Jain led R&D projects dealing with digitalization in the railway domain, including a patent in Digital Twin. For his PhD at Technical University Berlin, he worked on Deep Learning Mesh Parameterization of 3D Shapes for various applications. During his PhD, he developed 3D data registration softwares for medical instrument manufacturing companies. His focus areas include 3D Computer Vision, Edge AI, VR/AR Visualization amongst others.
About
I am Assistant Professor at IIT, Jodhpur in the department of Computer Science and Engineering. I graduated with Ph.D. with Cybersecurity in the department of Computer Science and Engineering at The Ohio State University (OSU) in Summer 2024. My advisors are†Dr. Zhiqiang Lin†and†Dr. Yinqian Zhang. I graduated from Malaviya National Institute of Technology, Jaipur (MNIT) with the Bachelor in Technology of Computer Engineering in 2013. My Bachelor theis project was supervised by†Dr. Manoj Singh Gaur.
†I am interested in research areas of Automated Formal Verification, System Security and Privacy, Trusted Execution Environment, Cryptography and Protocol Design.
About
Romi Banerjee, is an Assistant Professor, in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) - Jodhpur, an alumnus of the Diverse Intelligences Summer Institute (DISI), and part of the digital-curator team for the Society of Neuroscience of Creativity. She is also affiliated with the Centre of Education Technology and the Centre for Brain Science and Application - IIT Jodhpur.
It has been a while that she has been trying to understand and model how we do what we do and why we do what we do, towards the design of embodied, social (~empathetic) "thinking machines / systems". She draws inspiration from studies on the origin, evolution and development of fundamental cognitive abilities (e.g. attention, experience-formation, language acquisition, aesthetic-sense, time-space continuum, spontaneous thought, contemplation, wisdom, etc.) across all living species.
Lately, she has begun exploring EdTech solutions for embodied learning, Digital story-telling for heritage preservation, Human-AI co-creation, and Socio-cultural biases in AI.
About
I am currently working as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. Prior to this, I served as a Post-doctoral Researcher at the Faculty of Mathematics, Informatics, and Mechanics (MIM), University of Warsaw, Poland, where I worked in the Cryptography and Blockchain Group led by Prof. Stefan Dziembowski. I earned my Ph.D. from the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Patna, under the supervision of Prof. Somanath Tripathy in the SLIP: Security Lab @ IIT Patna.
My research interests include Blockchain and Off-chain Technologies, Payment Channel Networks, Cybersecurity and Privacy, Applied Cryptography, Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs), and Decentralized & Secure AI/ML.
About
I am an Assistant Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at IIT Jodhpur.
In 2020, I obtained my PhD in Computer†Science from the University of Iowa, advised by†Prof. Kasturi Varadarajan. Then,†during 2020-2023, I was a postdoctoral researcher at University of Bergen, where I was hosted by†Prof. Saket Saurabh.†
I am interested in theoretical computer science in general, but in particular this includes design of approximation and parameterized algorithms for clustering and geometric optimization problems.




Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49974-8

Structure and exfoliationmechanism of two-
dimensional boron nanosheets

Received: 24 December 2023 Jing-Yang Chung1,2,7, Yanwen Yuan1,2,7, Tara P. Mishra 1, Chithralekha Joseph1,
Pieremanuele Canepa 1, Pranay Ranjan3, El Hadi S. Sadki 4,

Accepted: 26 June 2024
Silvija Gradečak 1,2 & Slaven Garaj 1,5,6

Check for updates Exfoliation of two-dimensional (2D) nanosheets from three-dimensional (3D)
non-layered, non-van der Waals crystals represents an emerging strategy for
materials engineering that could significantly increase the library of 2D
materials. Yet, the exfoliation mechanism in which nanosheets are derived
from crystals that are not intrinsically layered remains unclear. Here, we show
that planar defects in the starting 3Dboronmaterial promote the exfoliationof
2D boron sheets—by combining liquid-phase exfoliation, aberration-corrected
scanning transmission electronmicroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, and density
functional theory calculations. We demonstrate that 2D boron nanosheets
consist of a planar arrangement of icosahedral sub-units cleaved along the
{001} planes of β-rhombohedral boron. Correspondingly, intrinsic stacking
faults in 3D boron formparallel layers of faulted planes in the same orientation
as the exfoliated nanosheets, reducing the {001} cleavage energy. Planar
defects represent a potential engineerable pathway for exfoliating 2D sheets
from 3D boron and, more broadly, the other covalently bonded materials.

Two-dimensional (2D) materials—defined by the extreme aspect ratio considerations, it would be expected that isotropic crystals give rise to
of the thickness vs. lateral dimensions—are traditionally derived from a 3D nanoparticles, not 2D nanosheets—making the exact nature of the
limited library of three-dimensional (3D) van der Waals (vdW) solids. exfoliation mechanism the most pressing question in the nascent
The vdW materials consist of stacked layers with strong in-plane field5. Answering this question would enable the rational design of a
atomic bonds and weak inter-layer coupling (Fig. 1a), which could be new class of 2D materials from other, hitherto untapped isotropic
separated through physical or chemical means to form 2D materials.
nanosheets1–3. This process inherently narrows the range of accessible Among the 2D structures exfoliated from non-layered materials,
2D materials to a finite set of starting vdW materials. The recent boron nanosheets17–26 have drawn particular interest due to their
observation of 2D nanosheets and nanoplatelets derived from non- potential for a range of applications, including energy storage17,
layered non-vdW crystals4–17, i.e., crystals with strong chemical bond- catalysts18,19, drug delivery20, photoelectronics21,23, bioimaging22–24, and
ing in all three directions, could significantly broaden the field of low- sensors26. Boron is often referred to as a ‘rule breaker’ because of its
dimensional systems. In the exfoliation process5, the starting non-vdW electron deficiency with multi-center covalent bonds, resulting in a
crystals with both high6–8 and—surprisingly—low11–17 bonding aniso- range of crystal phases with unusual stoichiometry and chemical
tropy (i.e., isotropic materials) can lead to the formation of 2D bonding27,28. Whilst 3D boron forms allotropes comprised primarily of
nanosheets and nanoplatelets. Yet, based on surface energy B12 icosahedral units, 2D boron can havemultiple phases29,30, including

1Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. 2Applied Materials - NUS Advanced Materials
Corporate Lab, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. 3Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Tech-
nology Jodhpur, Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India. 4Department of Physics, College of Science, United Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, UAE. 5Department of Physics,
Centre for Advanced 2D Materials, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. 6Department of Biomedical Engineering, National University of
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. 7These authors contributed equally: Jing-YangChung, Yanwen Yuan. e-mail: gradecak@nus.edu.sg; slaven@nus.edu.sg

Nature Communications | (2024)15:6122 1

1234567890():,;

1234567890():,;



Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49974-8

a Van der Waals Crystals b 3D Boron c 2D Boron
Sample A TEM Nanosheet

20 μm
Isotropic Crystals Nanoplatelets

Sample B 

Support film 100 nm

STEM HAADF
Nanosheet

50 μm

Boron Sample C 

? Nanoplatelets

50 μm Support film 100 nm

Fig. 1 | Liquid phase exfoliation of boron. a Schematic depiction of products and Sample C (Yamanaka Advanced Materials). c Converged beam transmission
through liquid-phase exfoliation from van der Waals (vdW) crystals, isotropic electron microscopy (TEM) image, and corresponding high-angle annular dark-
polycrystallinematerials, andboron.b Scanning electronmicroscopy (SEM) images field (HAADF) scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) image of 2D
of the starting boron material: Sample A (Sigma-Aldrich), Sample B (Alfa-Aesar), boron sheets suspended on a holey carbon TEM grid.

the synthetic graphene-like vacancy-decorated hexagonalmonolayers, other non-vdW materials, thus providing a new paradigm for engi-
termed borophene31. Therefore, unlike its isotropic counterpart, 2D neering 2D materials.
boron can uniquely display both metallic and semiconducting We show that the number of layers (i.e., thickness) in a nanosheet
character28, opening the possibility for an all-boron electronic device. and small variations in the viewing angle significantly affect the

To date, both bottom-up (chemical and physical vapor resulting STEM image, due to the overlapping structural icosahedral-
deposition)26,29–37 and top-down (ultrasonication and mechanical basedunits. Careful experimental observations coupledwith the STEM
exfoliation)17–25,38 syntheses have led to boron nanosheets with pur- simulations are required to avoid misinterpreting the results and to
portedly different crystal phases and thicknesses ranging from a precisely determine the 2D boron crystal structure.
monolayer to 10 nm. In the case of bottom-up approaches, the boron
layer grown on metallic substrates has a monoatomic, hexagonal Results
borophene structure31,33–35, as revealed by scanning tunneling micro- Exfoliation of boron nanosheets from diverse 3D crystals
scopy. On the other hand, many competing structural models of 2D- To elucidate the exfoliation mechanism of boron 2D sheets in relation
boron nanosheets synthesized through liquid-phase exfoliation (LPE) to materials-specific properties, we focus on a range of starting boron
have been proposed, including β-rhombohedral icosahedral planes materials from diverse sources: Samples A, B, and C were obtained
inherited from the 3D structure17,19–23,25, or the hexagonal monolayer from Sigma-Aldrich, Alfa-Aesar, and Yamanaka Advanced Materials,
phases of β12 and χ 18,24

3 . LPE is a method for separating layers from a respectively. These were selected as commercially available bulk
macroscopic material1 using ultrasonic waves or vortexes to generate boron materials, some of which were used in previous LPE
shear forces in a liquid medium and is not expected to alter the phase studies17,20,21,24,25, and we show they have various structural properties,
of the material. Considering that 3D boron is non-layered and has no including grain size and defect density. Examples of the particle sizes
vdW gap28, it is surprising that LPE results in the formation of 2D used for the liquid-phase exfoliation of Samples A, B, and C are shown
sheets, rather than nanoparticles typical of isotropic polycrystalline through scanning electron microscope (SEM) images in Fig. 1b. Con-
materials (Fig. 1a). trasting the distinctive faceted morphology of Sample A, the particles

Here, we provide a general framework for understanding the of Samples B and C display rougher surface morphology. From
formation of 2D nanosheets, by showing that the crystal planes of the polarized light microscope images shown in Supplementary Informa-
nanosheets correspond to the orientations of planar defects observed tion, Fig. 1a, b, the grain sizes of Samples A and B are observed to be
in the starting 3D boron phase. This was achieved by visualizing the within the same magnitude (mean diameter: 148.2 ± 78.9 µm and
phases, orientation, and internal structures of both the starting boron 105.3 ± 30.8 µm), while Sample C is roughly a magnitude smaller
material and 2D nanosheets down to the atomic level using aberration- (11.0 ± 3.7 µm). Samples A and B exhibit straight lines indicative of
corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM). planar defects cutting across the grains (Supplementary Fig. 2), with
Through correlation with atomic models and multi-slice STEM simu- closer-spaced defects visible in Sample B. Sample C exhibits the
lations,weshow that the starting 3Dboronmaterial and2Dnanosheets highest defect density, which can be viewed more clearly through
have the same icosahedral β-rhombohedral structure, where nanosh- electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) as well as strain-contrast
eets consist of a few layers of the icosahedral planes following the transmission electron microscope (TEM) and STEM images (Supple-
direction of the planar defects. Our STEM results are corroborated by mentary Figs. 1a and 3, respectively). Liquid-phase exfoliation of the
density functional theory (DFT) calculations, affirming the observed three boron samples was conducted using acetone as the sonication
defect to possess the lowest cleavage energy among all β- medium (20 g boron per 10ml solvent) for 16 h, similar to previous
rhombohedral cleavage planes—and together, they suggest that reports that have demonstrated boron exfoliation19,24. Following the
defectsmediate the exfoliationmechanism. Thesefindings provide the exfoliation, the sonicated products of Sample A contain mostly 3D
groundwork for future exfoliation of low-dimensional sheets from crystallites, whereas those of Samples B andC comprise a combination

Nature Communications | (2024)15:6122 2



Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49974-8

a c f g
6 6

Sample A A1g
Sample B Bulk

Sample A Sample C A1g

5 5 Exfol. 2D Boron Sample A

B Sample B
d 12 icosahedron

(edges) 4 4
Sample B

1 nm Sample C
3 3

b Sample C
5

B K Edge
4 Sample A 2 Exfol. 2D Boron 2

B12 icosahedron
3 (vertices)

Sample B e Exfol. 2D Boron
2 1 1

Vibration 
Sample C Center B28 cluster Intra-icosahedra Inter-

1 boron vibrations vibrations icosahedra of center 
vibrations boron atom

Exfol. 2D Boron 0 0
160 180 200 220 240 Triple-fused 10 15 20 25 30 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400

Energy Loss (eV) B28 icosahedron 2θ (degrees) Wavenumbers (cm-1)

Fig. 2 | Phase and elemental characterization of 3D boron and exfoliated (red) centrally located in themiddleof the rhombohedron. fX-ray diffraction (XRD)
2D boron. a Atomic-resolved center bright-field (C-BF) STEM image of 3D boron patterns of 3D Samples A, B and C and exfoliated Sample C. The simulated pattern
revealing the β-rhombohedral phase viewed along the [100] zone-axis. b Electron (in black) is shown indicating Miller indices of rhombohedral boron. The curves
energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) spectraof 3Dandexfoliated 2Dboron,with theBK have been vertically shifted for clarity. g Raman spectra of 3D boron and exfoliated
edge marked by the dashed line, and the B-O near-edge structure marked by the Sample C. Regions corresponding to the vibrations of the individual unit cell sub-
arrow. c Schematic unit cell of β-rhombohedral boron (projected in the [112] units are segmented by the vertical dashed lines and displayed at the bottom. The
orientation), which can be represented separately in terms of (d) B12 icosahedra shaded regions denote the A1g modes. The curves have been vertically shifted for
located at the vertices (light green) and middle of each edge (dark green) of the clarity.
rhombohedron, and (e) two B28 triple-fused icosahedra (brown) + one boron atom

of smaller crystallites, wedged platelets, and 2D sheets (see Supple- between the non-aligned low Z atomic columns in boron, as illustrated
mentary Fig. 4). Considering the larger grain sizes in Sample A, the lack in Supplementary Fig. 10.We, therefore, resorted to center bright-field
of nanosheets in this case thus indicates a possible relation between (C-BF) STEM—a coherent imaging method relying only on the signal
the exfoliation efficiency and the internal structure of the starting from the center of the convergent beam electron diffraction disk
material. (collection angleβ =0–15mrad). C-BFdisplays contrast reversal similar

An example of a 2D boron sheet exfoliated from Sample C is to conventional phase-contrast TEM39; by defocusing the electron
shown in Fig. 1c. The low dimensionality of the nanosheets is evi- probe such that the atomic columns appear with bright contrast, we
denced by the lack of observable Kikuchi patterns when the nanosh- show that all thebatches of 3Dmaterial have the sameβ-rhombohedral
eets are imaged under converged beam TEM at the back-focal plane phase (a representative C-BF image is shown Fig. 2a). This phase of
(Fig. 1c, top). The lowdimensionality is further corroboratedby the low boron has a rhombohedron unit cell consisting of 105 atomswith R3m
contrast of the nanosheet with respect to the supporting carbon film symmetry, lattice parameter a = b= c = 10.2 Å, α = β = γ = 65.1° 40, and is
(which is typically below 10 nm thick) when imaged using high-angle internally comprised of icosahedral subunits joined through inter-
annular dark-field (HAADF) STEM (Fig. 1c, bottom). For further icosahedral covalent bonds (Fig. 2c). The structure can be visualized as
description of the TEM/STEM analysis and comparison against thicker twenty units of B12 icosahedrons located at eachvertices (eight in total)
platelets, see Supplementary Figs. 5 and 6. AFM imaging of 100 flakes and middle of each edge (twelve in total) of the unit cell (Fig. 2d), and
likewise demonstrates their mean thickness to be 3.9 nm (Supple- two B28 triple-fused icosahedra flanking a single boron atom centrally
mentary Fig. 7). This thickness-screening and cross-correlation positioned in themiddle of the rhombohedron (Fig. 2e). As the phases
between TEM and AFM approaches is essential as we find that sol- of all starting 3D materials we investigated, regardless of the source,
vent/surfactant residue can erroneously give the appearance of are the same and icosahedral-based, determining other structural/
‘sheets’5 (for example, see Supplementary Figs. 8 and 9). STEMHAADF compositional differences is therefore crucial to understand their
imaging thus provides an efficient means to rapidly survey nanosheet different propensity for exfoliation.
dimensions, ensuring that phase characterization is not unin-
tentionally performed on thicker nanoplatelets, rather than on 2D Compositional/structural variations between 3D & 2D boron
nanosheets. To provide additional insights into the crystallographic relation

between the structure/composition of the 3D and exfoliated 2D sheets,
The crystal phase of 3D boron we next conducted electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), X-ray
We next focus on the atomic structure of 3D boron in relation to the diffraction (XRD) and Raman analysis before and after the exfoliation.
exfoliation mechanism of 2D sheets. Electron-transparent samples Core-loss EELS spectra show similar boron ionization edge (K-edge =
were prepared from bulk samples using a focused ion beam (FIB) and 188 eV) and near-edge signature across all starting 3D material
imaged under TEM and STEM. Incoherent HAADF STEM, with collec- (Fig. 2b), suggesting similar elemental composition and bonding.
tion angle β > 60mrad, typically provides the best separation between However, for the exfoliated boron, the presence of oxygen impurities
atomic columns due to Z-contrast and electron channeling. However, is evidenced by the near edge structure at 194 eV41, and is consistent
this imaging mode does not provide adequate contrast to distinguish with previous findings17,25 (see Supplementary Fig. 11 for further

Nature Communications | (2024)15:6122 3

EELS Intensity (arb. unit)

XRD Intensity (arb. units)

(100)
(1

( 1
1 1
1 )
0)

(110) (211)
(2 (

0 2 (111)
( 0 1

) 0)
22

( 1
2 )
22)
(22

(2 0
0 )

(2 1
1 )
1)

(31
( 0
3 )
0

( 0
3 )
20)

Raman Intensity (arb. units)



Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49974-8

elemental analysis). XRD results shown in Fig. 2f, confirm the β- reported in the literature. For example, rhombohedral crystals may
rhombohedral structure of the staring material and confirm that the appear hexagonal when viewed parallel to their two opposing corners.
phase of the exfoliated boron does not change after the exfoliation. As Under specific viewing orientations, the overlap between B28 and B12
the grain diameters of the samples are above values that would influ- unitsmay appear seemingly as ‘ridges’ of brighter contrast. Our results
ence X-ray kinematical scattering42, XRD peak broadening can be provide the means for boron atomic interpretation regardless of the
attributed to thepresenceofdefects in thematerial. The calculated full crystal orientation.
width at half maximum (FWHM) of the (111) peak for Samples A, B and In Fig. 4a–c, experimental C-BF STEM images of the three highest
C are 0.15°, 0.19° and 0.31°, respectively, and this broadening trend of symmetry zone-axes with the largest spacing across the icosahedron
FWHM confirms the defect analysis from light and electron micro- columns are directly matched to the simulated image and the corre-
scopy imaging. Raman spectroscopy shows that the phononmodes in sponding atomic model. When viewed along the [001] and
all the source 3D materials—Samples A, B, and C—are similar, further [110] orientations, the B12 icosahedron columns are aligned directly
emphasizing their crystallographic similarity. The boron nanosheets parallel to the electron beam, becoming clearly distinguishable, and
mostly retain the overall Raman profile compared to that of 3D can be used to identify the β-rhombohedral phase. However, in the
material, but exhibit peak shifts and changes in their intensities, as well case of the [110] projection, ¼ of the B12 icosahedra overlap directly
as the appearances of new Raman modes (Fig. 2g) indicating pre- with the B28 triple-fused icosahedra, and the structure appears with
ferential orientations during exfoliation. tetragonal symmetry rather than rhombohedral. This, without image

By comparing our Raman results with previously reported simulations, may lead to erroneous interpretation as new boron
experimental43,44 and theoretically-calculated45 Raman-activemodes of phases37. Interestingly, we found that lower symmetry projections—
β-rhombohedral boron (summarized in Table 1), we suggest that the such as [320] and [410]—when rotated about the (001) plane produce
emergence of the Raman peaks at 342 and 430 cm−1 in the case of 2D the appearance of seemingly layered structures (Fig. 4d, e). As these
boron nanosheets results from the bond-breaking in both B28 and B12 projections may lead to potential misinterpretation of the exfoliation
icosahedral clusters43,45. Furthermore, the complete disappearance of mechanism of this boron phase to be similar to vdW materials21, we
the peak at ~980 cm−1 indicates the loss of the inter-icosahedral sym- show here that these seemingly ‘alternating layers’ do not indicate the
metry, and the shifting of the 1211 cm−1 peak to 1140 cm−1 may likewise existence of layers but are instead due to the overlap projection of
arise from the breaking of the rhombohedral symmetry, which alters alternating planes of B12 and B28 units (see the models in Fig. 4d, e).
the polarization of the central boron atom in the unit cell43. We note Figure 4f–j shows the projection of β-rhombohedral boron when
that the ~309 cm−1 peak, and particularly the ~980 cm−1 peak are more viewed perpendicular to neither of its three crystallographic axes.
pronounced in SampleA than in Samples B andC,which is likely due to Likewise, for the [111], [112], and [112] zone-axes, the cluster of atoms
the presence of planar defects in Samples B and C, as we show below. formed from the overlap of both B12 and B28 units appear with tetra-

gonal and almost cubic-like symmetry (Fig. 4f–h). Although individual
Crystal phase and plane orientation of 2D boron atomic columns in the atom clusters are not easily resolved even with
The changes in the phonon modes of the exfoliated sheets are intri- aberration-corrected STEM, the distinctive shape of each cluster still
guing as theyprovide a clue to the exfoliationmechanismbased on the allows for their zone-axis determination. We draw particular attention
broken β-rhombohedral symmetry found in the original crystals. To to the [321] projection in Fig. 4j; due to the repeating atom clusters in
determine the exact phase and orientation of the LPE-exfoliated rhombohedral symmetry appearing seemingly as B12 icosahedrons,
nanosheets, we conducted atomic-resolved STEM andmatched it with this zone-axis of β-rhombohedral may potentially be mistaken as the
multi-slice simulations. Notably, for rhombohedral and other non- less complicated α-rhombohedral phase. Combining experimental
orthogonal crystals, the projected image of its planes stacked at an image with simulation, we show that the image still represents the β-
angle differs depending on the number of planes (up to the thickness rhombohedral phase, and the characteristic six smaller atom clusters
where the stack becomes periodic), implying that for thin samples, the surrounding each large cluster can be used for its identification.
thickness can be determined directly from the atomic arrangement in
the image. This is demonstrated in Fig. 3, where the atomic models Planar defects in β-rhombohedral boron
show the image of the projected {100} plane(s) to change depending Wenext focus on thehighdensities of extended crystal defects observed
onwhether a single unit cell layer (Fig. 3a) ormultilayers of the unit cell in Sample C, and their relationship to the exfoliation mechanism in
(Fig. 3b) are being imaged. boron. Figure 5a provides a visual example of the defect structure

Crucially, even small angle tilts can significantly influence the through bright-field TEM (similar to the images in Supplementary Fig. 3),
resulting projected images for icosahedral-based 2D boron (see Sup- where nearly parallel streaks of dark contrast are apparent in the bottom
plementary Fig. 13)—whichmayexplain the different phases previously right grain, indicating the presence of planar defects.
described in the literature. This dependencecontrastswith the case for Further, atomic-resolved STEM imaging of the defects in the [001]
simpler vdW-based nanosheets (see Supplementary Fig. 14 for the zone-axis (Fig. 5b) reveals that they areparallel to one another, take the
comparison), in which small tilts do not alter STEM projection sig- form of both twin boundaries and stacking faults (SFs), and sig-
nificantly. Figure 3c presents the STEM image of the exfoliated nificantly, have defect planes of {001} (supporting STEM simulations
nanosheet, while Fig. 3d–f shows the equivalent simulated projected are shown in the Supplementary Fig. 15). The twinned structure
images of 2, 4, and 10 layers of the {001} plane, respectively. By involves a mirror plane inserted along only the B12 units (illustrated in
matching the atomic column brightness and positions in the experi- Fig. 5c and labeled as {001}-I). The SF boundary (labeled as {001}-II) is
mental image in Fig. 3b with the simulated 4 {001} layers image in formed by breaking one of the triple-fused B28 icosahedral units into a
Fig. 3e, wedemonstrate here that: (1) the liquid-phase exfoliated boron single B12 icosahedron, and the other into a double-fused B21 icosa-
sheets planes are of the {001} family, and (2) boron can be exfoliated hedral unit. The newly formed B12 icosahedron then links with a pre-
down to at least 4 unit cells of icosahedral planes, implying thickness existing B12 unit by sharing a distorted triangular face, forming the SF
of 4.38 nm. interface. In thisway, the local rhombohedral symmetryof thenetwork

of B12 units is broken through the creation of the SF. The disruption to
Atomic-scale STEM characterization of β-rhombohedral boron the triple-fused B28 units also impacts the stability of the center boron
In Fig. 4, we show how the atomic-resolved projections of β- atom. These factors can also explain the different Ramanmodes of the
rhombohedral boron under different orientations may lead to unin- LPE boron and Samples B andC compared to themore pristine Sample
tentional structural misinterpretation of 2D boron nanosheets A shown in Fig. 2g.

Nature Communications | (2024)15:6122 4



Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49974-8

Table 1 | Ramanmodes inβ-rhombohedral boron from literature43, and themeasuredRaman frequencies of 3DSamplesA, B,C,
and 2D boron

Raman peaks Raman-active vibrations Vibrational Ref. 43. This work
region (cm−1) modes

Sample A Sample B Sample C LPE
Boron

~200 –400 Vibration of the B28 clusters 219 235 223 210 243
282 284 284
309 314 314 303 309

342
A1g + Eg 357 357 358 352

376 387 384 378
391

~400 –900 Intra-icosahedral B–B vibrations, where the strong peak at 414
~800cm−1 resulting from the breathing mode of B12 clusters 430

A1g + Eg 456 455 450 461
480 480 477 475
565 530 551 545
594 589 595 572

A1g 630 623 624 616 630
685 683 680 670 672

736 729
773 772 762

A1g 813 813 808 797 785
856 845 834

A1g + Eg 885 882 890 884 895
~950 –1150 Inter-icosahedral B-B vibrations A1g + Eg 987 985 985 975

1046
A1g + Eg 1097 1075 1081 1075 1055

1104 1106 1105
~1220 Stretching vibration of the single B atom in the center of the unit A1g + Eg 1217 1230 1224 1211 1140

cell parallel to the crystallographic c-axis
* New Raman peaks that are absent in the original 3D samples, but appear in exfoliated boron are shown in bold.

a b c d
electron beam 

raster scan
2D boron 

sheet
single layer multilayer

5 Å 2 layers
e f

STEM projection
{100}

4 layers 10 layers

Fig. 3 | Atomic structure of liquid-phase exfoliation (LPE) derived boron. with probe direction perpendicular to the {001} plane of β-rhombohedral boron
Schematic illustrations showing the differences in the STEM projection for boron with 2, 4, and 10 layers of the {001} plane, respectively. The same atomic patterns in
nanosheets derived from {001} icosahedral planes with (a) 1 layer, and (b) 4 layers. the experimental image in c and the simulated image in e are outlined to guide
c Atomic-resolved C-BF STEM of an exfoliated nanosheet. d–f STEM simulations the eye.

It can be observed that planar defects in Sample B and C are energy46, which likely explains why defects are predominantly along
always along the {001} plane and parallel to one another, as shown in the {001} planes. Taken together, our results indicate that planar
Fig. 5b and Supplementary Fig. 16. The growth of a crystal occurs along defects in β-rhombohedral boron play a fundamental role in the
the lowest surface energy facet to minimize free energy; for β- exfoliation of these covalently-bonded crystals, where crystal cleavage
rhombohedral boron, {001} planes have with the lowest surface can occur along these parallel-aligned defect planes during sonication.

Nature Communications | (2024)15:6122 5



Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49974-8

a [100] STEM Simulation f [111] STEM Simulation

b [110] STEM Simulation g [112] STEM Simulation

c [110] STEM Simulation h [112] STEM Simulation

d [320] STEM Simulation i [112] STEM Simulation

e [410] STEM Simulation j [321] STEM Simulation

Fig. 4 | Atomic-structure of 3D β-rhombohedral boron fromvarious zone-axes. of the electron beam direction (arrow) with the rhombohedral unit cell. (a–c) show
Simulated STEM images and atomic models are shown on the right of the experi- the three projections with the largest spacing between atomic columns where the
mental C-BF STEM images (β =0−15mrad) images. The B12 icosahedrons are B12 icosahedra columns are aligned parallel to the beam direction. (d–j) show
depicted in green, B28 triple-fused icosahedrons in brown, and the center boron viewing orientations of lower crystal symmetry. For clarity, bonds are omitted in
atom in red. The rhombohedrons on the left of the images demonstrate the relation the models for the lower symmetry projections.

a b d
Pristine {001}-I

Grain 1 Twin Twin {001}-I
Pristine {001}-II

oundary SF
Twin SF {001}-II

Twin 0 2.5 5.0 7.5
Grain b

5 Å Cleavage energy (J/m2) 
Planar defects e

Grain 2
200 nm

Twin SF
SF

c {001}-I SF
Twin boundary

SF
{001}-II

SF boundary 3 nm 5 Å
Pristine Defects Cleave

Fig. 5 | Role of planar defects in the exfoliation mechanism of boron. a TEM BF with the faulted plane marked by the black arrows. c Model of the unit cell pro-
image of 3D boron (Sample C) with a high density of planar defects in the bottom jected in the [001] depicting the atoms (red circles) forming the defect planes.
right crystal grain 2. b C-BF STEM image of β-rhombohedral boron projected along d Density functional theory (DFT) calculated energies for the formation of the
the [001] zone-axis showing a sequence of parallel planar defects, including twins {001}-I and {001}-II surfaces from the pristine crystal and from the planar defects.
and stacking faults (dashed lines indicate the defect plane). The icosahedral col- e Schematic of the defect-mediated exfoliation process (viewed from the [110]
umns are represented as red-ringed circles for easier visualization of the symmetry orientation). The icosahedral columns are represented as red-ringed circles,
breaking due to the defects. The magnified images of the twin boundary and stacking faults as dashed lines, and symmetry breaking of the crystal as solid lines.
stacking fault (SF), boxed in light blue and red, respectively, are shown on the right The black arrows represent the cleaving of the crystal from the stacking faults.

Nature Communications | (2024)15:6122 6

Sonicate



Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49974-8

Significantly, this differs from the case of vdW crystals, in which planar various zone-axes and thicknesses, and show that the exfoliated sheets
defects are not required for exfoliation due to the weaker vdW inter- are formed from the {001} planes of the β-rhombohedral phase. The
actions between layers. high-density defect planes in the 3D crystal were found to be along the

To verify the role of planar defects in the exfoliation of β- same crystallographic orientation as the exfoliated sheets and parallel
rhombohedral boron, we employed DFT47,48 to calculate the cleavage to one another. Moreover, our theoretical calculations show lower
energies of the {001}-I and {001}-II surfaces from both the pristine energy required to cleave the crystal from the stacking fault boundary.
crystal and their respective planar defects. Cleavage energy is Together, our results show that planar defects could be key to an
defined as the energy per unit area required to separate slabs of the engineerable pathway for the exfoliation of low-dimensional sheets
same material to form two free surfaces and can be seen simply as from boron and from a wider range of covalently bonded materials.
twice the surface energy of the cleaved slab49. As a starting point for
pristine boron calculations, we show that the {001}-II cleavage energy Methods
is the lowest at 4:39J/m2 and {001}-I surface energy is the highest at Liquid-phase exfoliation of boron
5:70J/m2, which is in agreement with the previous report by Hayami Three different starting bulk boron materials were used for liquid
et al.46. We next calculate the differences in the cleavage energies phase exfoliation: (1) Sigma-Aldrich Boron (crystalline, 99.7%, trace
when cleaving boron from a planar defect as opposed to the pristine metals basis), (2) Alfa Aesar Boron pieces (crystalline, 99.4% metals
boron lattice (Fig. 5d). The presence of an SF further reduces the basis) and (3) Yamanaka Advanced Materials UHP Boron powder;
energy required to form the {001}-II surface to 3:48J/m2, which is a 20mg boron bulk was added to 10mL of acetone, and bath-sonicated
significant reduction of 21%. In contrast, we did not observe as sig- for 16 h using a Elma Ultrasonics TI-H10 at 35 kHz, power of 200W and
nificant a difference in cleavage energy from twin boundaries at temperature of 300K.
ð5:73vs5:70J/m2Þ. Our combined DFT and STEM results thus show
that stacking faults likely facilitate the exfoliation process of the Raman spectroscopy and AFM characterization
boron nanosheets from the 3D boron, with crystal cleavage being For grain analysis, bulk boron crystals were polished using diamond
favored from these faulted planes. Essentially, the presence of these lapping films (final film grade of 0.1 µm), and viewed under a polarized
parallelly aligned defect planes produces extrinsic anisotropy in an light microscope (Olympus DSX1000) with the polarizer angle set
otherwise isotropic material. between 85°–90°. For Raman characterization, the sonicated boron

samplesweredrop-casted to a silicon substrate and annealed at 500 °C
Discussion under high vacuum (10−7 ~ 10−8Pa) for 6 h. Raman measurements of
The cleavage preferences along specific defect planes—and the obser- both 3Dboton nanocrystals and 2Dboron nanosheetswereperformed
vation that only grains from selected samples contain these defects— using aHORIBA Scientific LabRAMHREvolution RamanSpectrometer,
can explain the observed nanosheet morphologies of the sonicated with excitation laser 488nm (Lexel SHG 95 argon ion) and the spectra
products from Samples B and C and the lack of any from Sample A. If a recorded in backscattered geometry. Following exfoliation guidelines
region of crystal is bounded by two parallel planar defects with lower fromBackes et al.51, centrifugationwas conducted at 3421 g for 30min.
cleavage energy (such as stacking faults, as in the case of β- The supernatant were decanted, then spin-coated onto a Si wafer with
rhombohedral boron depicted in Fig. 5e, and experimentally shown in 300nm of native oxide to prevent agglomeration. The wafers were
Supplementary Figs. 16c and d), a flat nanosheet with uniform thickness further annealed under high vacuum (10−8 mbar) for 6 h to remove
will be formed after sonication—with the absolute thickness depending solvent patches. AFMmeasurements of LPE boronwas conductedwith
on the separation distance between the two planar defects. Such a Bruker Dimension Fastscan system, and data further processed with
exfoliation mechanism may also apply to and explain the high aspect the NanoScope Analysis software. XRD for the bulk and exfoliated
ratios of 2D sheets produced from other non-vdWmaterials, where it is boronwas conducted using a Bruker D8 Advance, and VESTAwas used
known that planar defects could exist8,11,13,16. If the planar defect runs to simulate the diffraction pattern.
above a grain boundary that is not parallel to the defect, or if the crystal
breaks between the defect and {001}-II plane not parallel to it, the Atomic-resolved STEM characterization and simulation
exfoliatednanoplateletwill havewedgedmorphology, aswe sometimes Electron transparent samples were prepared frombulk boron using the
observe. The 3D nanoparticles observed among the LPE products likely in-situ lamella lift-off method in a FEI Versa 3D DualBeam system (final
resulted from the cleaving of the crystal along grain boundaries without cleaning step at 2 kV, 27 pA), while exfoliated boron for TEM imaging
specific orientations. This contrasts the distinct exfoliated planes of were prepared through drop-casting the sonicated medium on Quan-
vdW materials, which follow the vdW layer orientation. From AFM tifoil holey carbon grids, which were annealed at 500 °C under vacuum
measurements of exfoliated boron (Supplementary Fig. 7e), we do not conditions of 10−7 ~ 10−8Pa for 6 h. Atomically-resolved STEM images
observe thickness dependence of the nanosheet area, unlike the case of were acquired with a JEOL JEM-ARM200F equipped with a cold field
vdWmaterials, as reported by Backes et al.50. This further suggests the emission gun and a fifth-order ASCOR aberration corrector operated at
exfoliation mechanism of 3D nonlayered materials such as boron is 200 kV, and ~31mradprobeconvergenceangleα. For characterizing the
different from vdW materials. Depending on the orientation and den- boron atomic structure, center bright-field imageswere capturedwith a
sities of planar defects formed in non-vdW materials, different orien- circular detector (collection semi-angle β: ~0–15mrad, performed at a
tations and distributions of nanosheets could be obtained. It is also camera length of 20 cm), and defocused to the contrast regime where
conceivable that other materials which can demonstrate even larger the atomic columns appear bright, and vacuum dark. EELS data were
reductionof cleavage energies from their inherent planar defects, could acquired at 80 kV (collection semi-angle: ~77mrad). To aid in STEM
result in a greater yield of nanosheets. image simulations, the atomic models were constructed and rotated

In summary, by studying the atomic structure of the 2D boron using the Atomsk software package52, cropped and visualized through
nanosheets and their parental 3D material, we show that the atomic VESTA53. Multislice STEM simulations were performed using the Pris-
structural morphology in non-vdW crystals plays a significant role in matic simulation code (pixel size = 0.02Å, potential bound = 2Å,
their 2Dmaterial exfoliation capabilities. The formation of nanosheets accelerating voltage = 200kV, α = 31 mrad, β =0-15 mrad)54.
is promoted in β-rhombohedral 3D boron samples with a high density
of stacking faults and smaller grains, as opposed to defect-free boron DFT calculations
samples with larger grains. Using C-BF STEM, we provide the The DFT calculations for the surface energy was performed using the
groundwork for the imaging and interpreting 2D and 3D boron of sufficiently constrained and appropriately normed (SCAN) meta-GGA

Nature Communications | (2024)15:6122 7



Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49974-8

exchange correlation functional using a projector augmented-wave 14. Ouyang, J. et al. Cryogenic exfoliation of 2D stanene nanosheets for
(PAW) potentials to describe the B wave functions, as implemented in cancer theranostics. Nano-Micro Lett. 13, 90 (2021).
the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP) code47,48. In the PAW 15. Tai, Z. et al. Fewatomic layered lithiumcathodematerials to achieve
formalism for B, the electrons that are treated explicitly are 1s22p1. A ultrahigh rate capability in lithium-ion batteries. Adv. Mater. 29,
plane-wave basis set with an energy cut off of 520 eV and 2 × 2 × 2 1700605 (2017).
Γ-centered Monkhorst-Pack k- point meshes were used for the calcu- 16. Wang, M., Zhang, F., Wang, Z. & Xu, X. Liquid-phase exfoliated
lation of the primitive cell of 3D B (105 atoms f.u. and R3m space silicon nanosheets: saturable absorber for solid-state lasers. Mate-
group). For the structures containing the stacking fault and twin, as rials 12, 201 (2019).
well as for the {001}-I, {001}-II, and stacking fault boundary surfaces, 17. Li, H. et al. Scalable production of few-layer boron sheets by liquid-
larger supercells were constructed and the k-pointmeshwere adjusted phase exfoliation and their superior supercapacitive performance.
to obtain the same sampling of the first Brillouin zone. The {001}-I, ACS Nano 12, 1262–1272 (2018).
{001}-II and stacking fault boundary surfaceswere constructed as slabs 18. Lin, H. et al. Scalable production of freestanding Few-Layer β12-
with ~1.2 nm vacuum distance to prevent interactions between the borophene single crystalline sheets as efficient electrocatalysts for
surfaces (see Supplementary Fig. 17). lithium-sulfur batteries. ACS Nano 15, 17327–17336 (2021).

The cleavage energies of the {001}-I and {001}-II separated from 19. Fan, Q. et al. High-yield production of few-layer boron nanosheets
the pristine, twinned, and stacking fault structures in 3D crystals were for efficient electrocatalytic N2 reduction. Chem. Commun. 55,
calculated using the following equation: 4246–4249 (2019).

20. Ji, X. et al. A novel top-down synthesis of ultrathin 2D boron
ES1 + ES2  E nanosheets for multimodal imaging-guided cancer therapy. Adv.

Cleavage energy= crystal , ð1Þ
A Mater. 30, 1803031 (2018).

21. Wang, X. et al. Bandgap Engineering of hydroxy-functionalized
where ES1, ES2, and Ecrystal are the energies of slab 1, slab 2, and the borophene for superior photo-electrochemical performance.
crystal, respectively; and A is the surface area of the cleaved {001} Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 59, 23559–23563 (2020).
interface surface. 22. Ma, D. et al. Ultrathin boron nanosheets as an emerging two-

dimensional photoluminescence material for bioimaging. Nanos-
Data availability cale Horiz. 5, 705–713 (2020).
The EELS, XRD, andRamandata generated in this study areprovided in 23. Ma, C. et al. Broadband nonlinear photonics in few-layer bor-
the Source Data file. Any additional data that supports the findings of ophene. Small 17, 2006891 (2021).
this study, and models used for simulation, calculation, and visuali- 24. Ranjan, P. et al. Freestandingborophene and its hybrids.Adv.Mater.
zation are available from the corresponding authors upon 31, 1900353 (2019).
request. Source data are provided in this paper. 25. Zhang, F. et al. Few-layer and large flake size borophene: prepara-

tion with solvothermal-assisted liquid phase exfoliation. RSC Adv.
References 10, 27532–27537 (2020).
1. Coleman, J. N. et al. Two-dimensional nanosheets produced by 26. Hou, C. et al. Borophene pressure sensing for electronic skin and

liquid exfoliation of layered materials. Science 331, 568–571 (2011). human-machine interface. Nano Energy 97, 107189 (2022).
2. Novoselov, K. S. et al. Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon 27. Albert, B. & Hillebrecht, H. Boron: elementary challenge for

films. Science 306, 666–669 (2004). experimenters and theoreticians. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 48,
3. Splendiani, A. et al. Emerging Photoluminescence in Monolayer 8640–8668 (2009).

MoS2. Nano Lett. 10, 1271–1275 (2010). 28. Sun, X. et al. Two-dimensional boron crystals: structural stability,
4. Zavabeti, A. et al. A liquidmetal reaction environment for the room- tunable properties, fabrications andapplications.Adv. Funct.Mater.

temperature synthesis of atomically thinmetal oxides.Science358, 27, 1603300 (2017).
332–335 (2017). 29. Liu, Y., Tai, G., Hou, C.,Wu, Z. & Liang,X. Chemical vapor deposition

5. Kaur, H. & Coleman, J. N. Liquid-phase exfoliation of nonlayered growth of few-layer β12-Borophane on Copper foils toward broad-
non-Van-Der-Waals crystals into nanoplatelets. Adv. Mater. 34, band photodetection. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 15, 14566–14574
2202164 (2022). (2023).

6. Guan, G. et al. Electrostatic-driven exfoliation and hybridization of 30. Tai, G. et al. Synthesis of atomically thin boron films on copper foils.
2D nanomaterials. Adv. Mater. 29, 1700326 (2017). Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 54, 15473–15477 (2015).

7. Hu, C.-X. et al. Solvent‐assisted anisotropic cleavage of transition 31. Mannix, A. J. et al. Synthesis of borophenes: anisotropic, two-
metal carbide into 2D nanoflakes. Small Struct. 2, 2100039 (2021). dimensional boron polymorphs. Science 350, 1513–1516 (2015).

8. Kaur, H. et al. Production of Quasi-2D platelets of nonlayered iron 32. Hou, C., Tai, G., Liu, Y. & Liu, X. Borophene gas sensor.Nano Res 15,
pyrite (FeS2) by liquid-phase exfoliation for high performance bat- 2537–2544 (2022).
tery electrodes. ACS Nano 14, 13418–13432 (2020). 33. Feng, B. et al. Experimental realization of two-dimensional boron

9. Guo, Y. et al. Exfoliation of boron carbide into ultrathin nanosheets. sheets. Nat. Chem. 8, 563–568 (2016).
Nanoscale 13, 1652–1662 (2021). 34. Kiraly, B. et al. Borophene synthesis on Au(111). ACS Nano 13,

10. Hu, Z. et al. Rapidmassproductionof two-dimensionalmetal oxides 3816–3822 (2019).
and hydroxides via the molten salts method. Nat. Commun. 8, 35. Wu, R. et al. Large-area single-crystal sheets of borophene on
15630 (2017). Cu(111) surfaces. Nat. Nanotechnol. 14, 44–49 (2019).

11. Chen, Q. et al. Enhanced supercapacitive performance of novel 36. Mazaheri, A., Javadi, M. & Abdi, Y. Chemical vapor deposition
ultrathin SiC nanosheets directly by liquid phase exfoliation. Inorg. of two-dimensional boron sheets by thermal decomposition
Chem. Commun. 106, 174–179 (2019). of diborane. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 13, 8844–8850

12. Feng, C. et al. Germanene-based theranostic materials for surgical (2021).
adjuvant treatment: inhibiting tumor recurrence and wound infec- 37. Wu, Z., Tai, G., Shao,W.,Wang, R. &Hou,C. Experimental realization
tion. Matter 3, 127–144 (2020). of quasicubic boron sheets. Nanoscale 12, 3787–3794 (2020).

13. Puthirath Balan, A. et al. Exfoliation of a non-van der Waals material 38. Chahal, S. et al. Borophene via micromechanical exfoliation. Adv.
from iron ore hematite. Nat. Nanotechnol. 13, 602–609 (2018). Mater. 33, 2102039 (2021).

Nature Communications | (2024)15:6122 8



Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49974-8

39. Pennycook, S. J., Varela, M., Hetherington, C. J. D. & Kirkland, A. I. Research Foundation, Singapore under its RIE Roles for SGUnited Jobs -
Materials advances through aberration-corrected electron micro- NUS Tranche 1 Project (NRF-MP-2020-0004). The authors also
scopy. MRS Bull. 31, 36–43 (2006). acknowledge the Facility for Analysis, Characterization, Testing and

40. Gražulis, S. et al. Crystallography Open Database - an open-access Simulation, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, for use of
collection of crystal structures. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 42, 726–729 their electron microscopy facilities and Materials Science Shared Facil-
(2009). ities, National University of Singapore, for access to XRD, Raman and

41. Mountjoy, G., Corrias, A. & Gaskell, P. H. An electron energy loss TEM, andDrWu Jiang fromOxford Instruments for EBSDmeasurements.
spectroscopy study of Ni60B40 alloys prepared by chemical
reduction and melt spinning. J. Non-Cryst. Solids 192-193, Author contributions
616–619 (1995). S.Ga. and S.Gr. conceptualized (with initial input from ESS) and super-

42. Holder, C. F. & Schaak, R. E. Tutorial on powder X-ray diffraction for vised theproject. Y.Y., C.J. and P.R. synthesized the L.P.E. boron. Y.Y. and
characterizing nanoscale materials. ACS Nano 13, 7359–7365 C.J. performed the X.R.D., A.F.M. and Ramanmeasurements/analysis. J.-
(2019). Y.C. prepared the TEM samples, conducted the polarized light and TEM/

43. Werheit, H. et al. Isotopic phonon effects in β-rhombohedral boron STEM measurements/simulations, and generated the models for simu-
—non-statistical isotope distribution. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 24, lations/calculations. T.P.M. performed the DFT calculations and analysis
175401 (2012). under the supervision of PC. All authors contributed to thewriting of the

44. Werheit, H. et al. Raman effect in icosahedral boron-rich solids. Sci. manuscript.
Technol. Adv. Mater. 11, 023001 (2010).

45. Hyodo, H., Nezu, A., Soga, K. & Kimura, K. Self-compensation Competing interests
property of β-rhombohedral boron doped with high Li concentra- The authors declare no competing interests.
tion. Solid State Sci. 14, 1578–1583 (2012).

46. Hayami, W. & Otani, S. The role of surface energy in the growth of Additional information
boron. Cryst. J. Phys. Chem. C. 111, 688–692 (2007). Supplementary information The online version contains

47. Kresse, G. & Furthmüller, J. Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio supplementary material available at
total-energy calculations using a plane-wave basis set. Phys. Rev. B https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49974-8.
Condens. Matter 54, 11169–11186 (1996).

48. Kresse, G. & Joubert, D. From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to the Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
projector augmented-wave method. Phys. Rev. B Condens. Matter Silvija Gradečak or Slaven Garaj.
59, 1758–1775 (1999).

49. Han, Y. et al. Surface energies, adhesion energies, and exfoliation Peer review informationNatureCommunications thanksNicholasClark,
energies relevant to copper-graphene and copper-graphite sys- Harneet Kaur, and the other, anonymous, reviewer for their contribution
tems. Surf. Sci. 685, 48–58 (2019). to the peer review of this work. A peer review file is available.

50. Backes, C. et al. Equipartition of energy defines the size–thickness
relationship in liquid-exfoliated nanosheets. ACS Nano 13, Reprints and permissions information is available at
7050–7061 (2019). http://www.nature.com/reprints

51. Backes, C. et al. Guidelines for exfoliation, characterization and
processing of layered materials produced by liquid exfoliation. Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
Chem. Mater. 29, 243–255 (2017). isdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

52. Hirel, P. Atomsk: A tool for manipulating and converting atomic
data files. Comput. Phys. Commun. 197, 212–219 (2015). Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons

53. Momma, K. & Izumi, F. VESTA 3 for three-dimensional visualization Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
of crystal, volumetric andmorphologydata. J. Appl. Crystallogr.44, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
1272–1276 (2011). long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the

54. Rangel DaCosta, L. et al. Prismatic 2.0 - Simulation software for source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
scanning and high resolution transmission electron microscopy changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
(STEM and HRTEM). Micron 151, 103141 (2021). article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless

indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
Acknowledgements included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
We acknowledge support by Agency for Science, Technology and use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
Research (A*STAR) Singapore under its Advanced Manufacturing and use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
Engineering (AME) Programmatic grant (Award A18A9b0060, SGa), and holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
support byMinistry of Education (MOE) Academic Research Fund (AcRF) licenses/by/4.0/.
Tier 2 (MOE-T2EP50221-0018, SGa, and MOE-T2EP50220-0016, SGr).
ESS and SGa acknowledge support from a United Arab Emirates © The Author(s) 2024
University–Asian Universities Alliance (UAEU–AUA) Joint Research Pro-
ject (Grant Number 31R196). J-YC andYYwere supportedby theNational

Nature Communications | (2024)15:6122 9



PHYSICAL REVIEW B 110, 134422 (2024)

Imaging atomic-scale magnetism with energy-filtered differential phase contrast method

Devendra Singh Negi,1,* Peter A. van Aken ,2 and Jan Rusz 3,†

1Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur,
NH 62, Surpura Bypass Road, Karwar, Rajasthan 342030, India

2Stuttgart Center for Electron Microscopy, Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, Heisenbergstr.1, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany
3Department of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University, P.O. Box 516, 75120 Uppsala, Sweden

(Received 28 November 2022; revised 6 August 2024; accepted 25 September 2024; published 15 October 2024)

We propose differential phase contrast (DPC) imaging using energy-filtered electrons to image the magnetic
properties of materials at the atomic scale. Compared to DPC measurements with elastic electrons, our simula-
tions predict about two orders of magnitude higher relative magnetic signal intensities and sensitivity to all three
vector components of magnetization.

DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.110.134422

I. INTRODUCTION was discussed in Ref. [13]. Aberration-corrected STEM en-
abled also the next step in the evolution of the method, namely,

Nanostructured magnetic materials are used in a wide the detection of microscopic electric fields around atoms
range of applications, spanning environmental, biomedical, [14–18]. A detailed quantum mechanical treatment was pre-
and industrial fields. These and future potential applications, sented in Refs. [19,20] and advantages of pixelated detectors
including energy harvesting, magnetic sensors, or refriger- were analyzed in detail [21,22]. A possibility to also detect
ation, drug delivery, data storage, and others, explain the microscopic magnetic fields in DPC-STEM was discussed
broad range and intensity of research initiatives in this and computationally explored in Refs. [23,24]. Reaching
area [1]. The characterization of magnetic materials at high this milestone in experiments, microscopic magnetic fields
spatial resolution, reaching nanometer or an atomic scale, in STEM-DPC were detected in 2022 in an antiferromagnet
is an essential part in the development of devices. Sev- Fe
eral strategies exist, including surface-sensitive methods like 2O3 [25] and utilized for mapping atomically thin antifer-

romagnetic domain walls in CuMnAs [26].
nitrogen-vacancy center magnetometry [2] and spin-polarized Since its inception in 1974, the DPC-STEM went through
scanning tunneling microscopy [3], and bulk-sensitive meth- tremendous improvements. Nevertheless, for atomic-scale
ods using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), such as studies, the DPC-STEM has also some limitations. Mea-
holographic methods [4,5], electron magnetic circular dichro- surements are directly interpretable only when the sample
ism [6], four-dimensional (4D)-STEM approach [7], and is ultrathin (typically well below 10 nm), otherwise the dy-
differential phase contrast imaging, which is in the focus of namical diffraction scrambles the images [19,24] and their
our work. interpretation then requires matching with simulations. Fur-

Differential phase contrast scanning TEM (DPC-STEM), thermore, the magnetic signal strength is typically several
is an imaging technique in transmission electron microscopy, orders of magnitude weaker than the electric one [24,25].
which is used to directly visualize the electric and magnetic Finally, in STEM-DPC one has access only to the in-plane
fields [8,9]. DPC-STEM probes the elastically deflected in- magnetic fields, which may require to switch off objective lens
cident electrons due to their interaction with the electric and or to have a magnetic-field-free sample stage [27].
magnetic fields in the material. It was successfully used to In this article we show that the differential phase contrast
image skyrmions [10] or electric fields in pn-junctions [11]. method applied to energy-filtered diffraction patterns at core
Using aberration-corrected STEM instruments, this technique level edges can reveal magnetic information at the atomic
has been pushed down to the nanometer scale [12] and the sep- scale and, compared to its elastic scattering counterpart [25], it
aration of nanoscale electric and magnetic-field contributions would provide the following advantages: The relative strength

of the magnetic signal improves by about two orders of
magnitude, and, the magnetization component parallel to the

*Contact author: devendra@iitj.ac.in incoming beam influences DPC images. We outline methods
†Contact author: jan.rusz@physics.uu.se how to retrieve this information.

Published by the American Physical Society under the terms of the II. METHODS
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license. Further
distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s) The scheme of the proposed experiment is shown in
and the published article’s title, journal citation, and DOI. Funded Fig. 1(a). A convergent electron beam of atomic size
by Bibsam. passes through the sample in zone-axis direction. Then, the

2469-9950/2024/110(13)/134422(6) 134422-1 Published by the American Physical Society



NEGI, VAN AKEN, AND RUSZ PHYSICAL REVIEW B 110, 134422 (2024)

FIG. 1. (a) Schematic diagram representing the energy-filtered
DPC-STEM method. The atomic size probe passes through the
crystal in zone axis orientation and an energy filter with a slit is
used to generate a diffraction pattern formed by electrons with en-
ergy losses within a chosen energy interval. (b) Example results FIG. 2. (a) Projected crystal structure of LaMnAsO along the c
of energy-filtered DPC-STEM assuming a magnetization parallel axis with indicated scanned region, as highlighted in panel (b). Panels
with the beam direction. The beam deflection angles (θx, θy ) and (c) to (f) show explicitly the Mn L3-edge energy-filtered diffraction
the corresponding azimuthal angle of the beam deflection φ are patterns for a grid on 9 × 9 beam positions. The panels show com-
shown (see the color wheel for interpretation of colors as beam ponents of double-differential inelastic scattering cross-section due
deflection directions). The θx and θy are extracted using the indicated to 1μB of magnetization in (c) x-direction, (d) y-direction,
formulas (see also equations in the text below), where the intensi- (e) z-direction, and (f) a nonmagnetic component normalized per
ties Iup, Idown, Ileft, Iright come from four segments of the detector, as hole in the 3d-shell.
indicated in panel (c).

can be seen in Fig. 2(a), assuming an electron beam parallel
to the crystallographic c-axis.

electrons pass through an energy filter and only electrons with We calculated inelastic scattering intensities by using
an energy-loss range corresponding to a chosen core-level MATS.V2 software, which combines the multislice and Bloch-
edge would be allowed to pass. These electrons would form waves approaches for calculating the double differential
an energy-filtered diffraction pattern, which could be detected scattering cross section [29]. This is in contrast with
either by a pixelated detector or a segmented detector. Thus, simulations of magnetic DPC-STEM in the elastic regime
the only difference from a standard DPC-STEM is the energy [24] utilizing the Pauli multislice method [30]. The MATS.V2
filtering of the scattered electrons. method neglects the weak magnetic effects in elastic propaga-

As a model system, we chose the LaMnAsO crystal, which tion, but it offers conveniently to calculate inelastic scattering
is antiferromagnetic in nature, thus offering a platform for intensities integrated over an energy range of a selected core-
exploring the feasibility of imaging antiferromagnetism by level edge and to separate the intensities into nonmagnetic
the proposed method. It has a tetragonal crystal structure and magnetic contributions, the latter three also separated
with a = 4.12 Å and c = 9.03 Å and an antiferromagnetic into contributions due to magnetic moments along individual
arrangement of magnetic moments of Mn atoms is such that x, y, z directions. The magnetic effects in the inelastic regime
along the c-axis the moments are always parallel within an (EMCD) reach relative strengths of the order of 10%, while in
atomic column, while neighboring atomic columns have op- the elastic regime the relative strengths of 10−4 are typically
posite signs of magnetic moments. All magnetic moments are observed [25,31]. The convergence parameter in MATS.V2 was
parallel to the c-axis [28]. The arrangement of atomic columns set to 5 × 10−7. The acceleration voltage in TEM was set to

134422-2



IMAGING ATOMIC-SCALE MAGNETISM WITH … PHYSICAL REVIEW B 110, 134422 (2024)

100 kV and the convergence semi-angle of the incoming beam
to 20 mrad. Calculations have covered scattering angles within
the range from −25 mrad to 25 mrad in both θx, θy directions,
respectively, with a step of 2 mrad.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

We first performed simulations in the (001) zone axis ori-
entation, i.e., with beam direction parallel with the c-axis of
LaMnAsO, which is also parallel with the magnetic moment
directions. An array of 8 × 8 beam positions has been consid-
ered, spanning the area of the entire unit cell. Using the crystal
periodicity, this has been extended to 9 × 9 beam positions
for visualization purposes in Fig. 2 to include all borders
around the unit cell. Energy-filtered diffraction patterns were
calculated for the Mn-L3 edge (approximate energy-loss range
of 640–650 eV). See Ref. [32] for more details about the com-
putational method. For the purpose of model considerations,
in simulations we will assume not only the experimentally FIG. 3. Energy-filtered DPC-STEM results for LaMnAsO with
observed magnetic moment direction parallel to c-axis (or 10-nm sample thickness. Rows from top to bottom show electron
z-direction), but we will also present results for hypothetical beam deflection angles due to magnetism, assuming a magnetic mo-

magnetic moment directions along the a- and b-axes (x- and ment orientation along the x-, y- or z-direction, and the nonmagnetic

y-directions, respectively). intensity. Columns from left to right show the deflection angles

Figures 2(c)–2(f) summarize the results of our calculations θx, θy (see Fig. 1 and text below for their definition), and magnitude
and direction of the (θx, θy ) vector (in mrad). The color wheel in

for a 10-nm-thick LaMnAsO sample. They show four sets
Fig. 1(b) helps to interpret directions of beam displacement vectors.

of 9 × 9 energy-filtered diffraction patterns, where each set
shows only a particular contribution to the differential scat-
tering cross section: Figs. 2(c)–2(e) show intensities due to Finally, the tableau of the nonmagnetic component of the
magnetism, assuming the magnetic moment oriented along diffraction patterns presented in Fig. 2(f) shows features that
the x-, y-, and z-directions, respectively, and Fig. 2(f) repre- are qualitatively very similar to observations made in the
sents the nonmagnetic intensity. When the magnetic moments elastic regime, see, for example, Refs. [17,19]. A circular
lie in-plane parallel to the x-direction, characteristic up/down ronchigram (however, here consisting of inelastically scat-
features appear in the diffraction patterns, together with an tered electrons only) is being deformed as the beam is shifted
overall negative or positive background intensity appearing around the atomic column. Thus, it can be expected that
in the neighborhood of the atomic column at scan positions postprocessing such diffraction patterns assuming a four-
on the left or right side, respectively, for a viewing direction segment detector or via evaluation of center of the mass
parallel to the magnetic moment. The same holds true for the vectors will lead to doughnut-shaped features, centered at the
magnetic moments pointing in y-direction, see Fig. 2(d) being atomic sites, as in the elastic DPC-STEM.
identical as Fig. 2(c), only rotated 90 degrees anticlockwise. For all of the beam positions, we calculated the beam

For magnetic moments along the z-direction, the situation deflection vectors (θx, θy). A four-segment detector has been
is more complicated and rich patterns appear depending on assumed with inner and outer collection semi-angles set to
the beam position relative to the Mn atomic column. Never- 6 mrad and 24 mrad, respectively. The detector segments,
theless, intensities are nonzero, opening for a possibility to Fig. 1(c), have their center of mass at angles ϑ = ±16.4 mrad
detect also magnetization along the z-direction. In the con- in a horizontal or vertical direction, respectively. The beam
text of DPC imaging, one typically focuses on magnetization deflection angles are then obtained by
components perpendicular to the beam direction. However,
in the EELS regime, magnetization along the beam direction θx = Iright − Ileft

INM ϑ,
gives rise to modifications of scattering cross-section due to tot

electron magnetic circular dichroism (EMCD; [33]). It has
θy = Iup − Idown

been discussed previously that shifting the beam results in an INM ϑ,
tot

asymmetric redistribution of the EMCD signal in a direction
perpendicular to the beam shift [34–36]. This gives rise to where INM

tot is a sum of nonmagnetic intensities from all four
an exciting possibility to map magnetic moments parallel to detector segments. Note that this value depends on the beam
the beam direction with the DPC-like methods in the EELS position. In the evaluation of the magnetic and nonmagnetic
regime. The expected beam deflection vectors due to mag- intensities [37] we assumed a spin magnetic moment of
netism should then be perpendicular to the direction of the 2.43μB per Mn atom and five holes in its 3d shell, based on
beam shift with respect to the atomic column. This contrasts density functional theory calculations in Ref. [38].
with the deflection vectors in the elastic scattering, which Results of this analysis are shown in Fig. 3. Processing all
point towards the atomic column [14,19]. the diffraction patterns from Fig. 2, we obtained real-space

134422-3



NEGI, VAN AKEN, AND RUSZ PHYSICAL REVIEW B 110, 134422 (2024)

images of x- and y-components of the beam deflection angles
(in mrad), shown in the first and second columns of Fig. 3,
respectively. The direction [or phase φ = arctan(θy/θx )] and
size of the beam deflection vectors are encoded in the hue and
brightness of the colors, see the color wheel in Fig. 1(b).

We start the discussion of the results for the nonmagnetic
intensities, shown in the bottom row. Note that we obtained a
volcano-shaped intensity profile and a vortex-like phase dis-
tribution, exactly as in the DPC-STEM in the elastic regime.
The directions of the deflection vectors, encoded in the phase
image, point towards the center of the atomic column, again
in close analogy with elastic DPC-STEM at atomic resolution.
This suggests that atomic-scale DPC-STEM can also be real-
ized by using energy-filtered inelastically scattered electrons,
in an element-selective way. The price paid would be, of
course, the significantly reduced electron counts.

The top row of Fig. 3 shows the DPC analysis due to
magnetization along the x-direction. The horizontal deflec-
tion of the beam, θx, shows a relatively complicated pattern
with alternating positive and negative deflections in the four FIG. 4. The same as Fig. 3 for a sample thickness of 20 nm.
quadrants surrounding the Mn atomic column. However, the
amplitude of these deflections is relatively small, almost two
orders of magnitude lower than the deflections due to non-
magnetic scattering. On the other hand, the deflection in the of 1 μrad. In our simulations, the beam displacements due to
y-direction, θy, is of significantly larger magnitude and it the nonmagnetic component of the scattering cross section are
is of the same sign within a region surrounding individual about an order of magnitude higher, reaching approximately 5
Mn atomic columns. This is clearly seen in the phase image mrad. However, the magnetic component of scattering cross
(the third column), indicating that the beam deflection due section causes displacements of over 0.1 mrad, i.e., two
to interaction with the in-plane magnetization has a uniform orders of magnitude larger than in the elastic regime. This
direction in the vicinity of an atomic column. The beam shift suggests that as long as the fractional intensity of the core-
in response to magnetization along the y-direction has an level edges is above (1/100)2 of the zero loss peak, the signal
analogical behavior. to noise ratio of magnetic DPC-STEM has the potential to be

Intriguing is the case of the beam response to the mag- higher at the core-level edges than in the elastic regime.
netization in the z-direction. In the elastic regime, the We also performed simulations for a thicker sample. Fig-
magnetization component parallel to the incoming beam is ure 4 shows results analogical to Fig. 3, calculated for a
invisible. However, in the inelastic regime, we observe non- LaMnAsO sample with a thickness of 20 nm. At this sam-
negligible beam deflections, which mimic the behavior due ple thickness, the DPC-STEM images in the elastic regime
to a nonmagnetic component. The intensity profile of the are expected to be strongly influenced by dynamical diffrac-
deflections has a similar doughnut shape around the atomic tion and in a consequence they are rarely interpretable even
column, albeit with reduced intensity in the range of about 5% qualitatively [16]. We also observe a strong distortion of the
(yet still significant). The fundamental difference is, however, beam displacement due to a nonmagnetic component, which
in the directions of these deflections. While the nonmagnetic does not even allow to determine the position of Mn atomic
deflections bend the beam towards the atomic column, the columns. However, the displacements due to magnetic com-
interaction with magnetization parallel to the beam deflects ponents to a large degree retain their shapes. This curious
the beam to a direction perpendicular with respect to the di- observation has likely a limited use because the magnetic
rection towards the atomic column, in line with the discussion displacements will always be combined with the nonmagnetic
above about the effect of beam shift on EMCD distribution. ones. Nevertheless, it might be possible to devise methods that
See the phase image, column 3, where the color wheel is would detect qualitative differences in displacement maps due
rotated by 90 degrees with respect to the one for the nonmag- to antiferromagnetism in the vicinity of otherwise equivalent
netic component. This qualitatively different behavior opens Mn atomic columns.
for opportunities to isolate it from the nonmagnetic beam As it was indicated above, the phase map offers a path-
deflection. Note also that the rotation is clockwise for one of way to image the nature of magnetic moment alignment in
the Mn atomic columns and anti-clockwise for the other one, the materials. The phase maps of the magnetic signal are
reflecting the opposite signs of the magnetic moments in these precisely inverted and represent the antiferromagnetic align-
two atomic columns. ment of Mn atoms in LaMnAsO. However, the phase map

It is striking that the beam deflection angles in the EELS of the nonmagnetic signal shows the same profile for both
regime are significantly larger than those observed in atomic Mn atomic columns. Although, the phase map rotates as a
resolution DPC-STEM images in the elastic regime. Kohno function of the thickness of the specimen (compare Mz maps
et al. [25] reported nonmagnetic deflections on the order of in Fig. 3 with Fig. 4), yet such nature remains invariant.
0.5 mrad and the average magnetic displacements on the order Therefore, the inelastic DPC method could be adopted for

134422-4



IMAGING ATOMIC-SCALE MAGNETISM WITH … PHYSICAL REVIEW B 110, 134422 (2024)

Along this beam direction, the projected distances of the
Mn atomic columns are only about 2 Å, leading to an overlap
of the doughnut-shaped features around the atomic columns
in the nonmagnetic component of the beam displacement.
Also, there is a large “empty space” highlighting the element-
selectivity of the inelastic DPC-STEM method since the Mn
atoms are all located within one plane. Yet, all the qualitative
features observed in the (001) zone axis remain valid, both in
terms of the directions and relative magnitudes of the beam
deflections.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In summary, on the basis of detailed simulations, we pro-
pose DPC-STEM experiments on energy-filtered diffraction
patterns as a promising method for probing magnetism at

FIG. 5. Energy-filtered DPC-STEM results for LaMnAsO with the atomic-scale. Successful realization of such experiments
10-nm sample thickness with an electron beam incoming along the would have a great impact on the development of functional
(100) zone axis. For other details see Fig. 3. magnetic nanostructures.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

direct imaging of the nature of magnetism at the atomic This project received funding from Science and
scale. Education Research Board (SERB), India under

To further reinforce our results, we performed simulations Grant No. SRG/2022/000825. The SEED Grant No.
for LaMnAsO with the incident beam parallel to the [100] I/SEED/PRJ/DSN/AB/20220044 from IIT Jodhpur is
zone axis. This provides a realistic scenario to observe mag- acknowledged. J.R. acknowledges the support of the Swedish
netic moments that are perpendicular to the beam direction, Research Council (Grant No. 2021-03848), Olle Engkvist’s
namely, along the x-axis, corresponding to crystallographic foundation (Grant No. 214-0331), and Knut and Alice
c-axis. Results are summarized in Fig. 5, along with other Wallenbergs’ foundation (Grant No. 2022.0079). The
(hypothetical) directions of magnetic moments. We used the simulations were enabled by resources provided by the
same computational parameters, except for the grid of beam National Academic Infrastructure for Supercomputing in
positions in STEM calculation being set to 8 × 14, reflecting Sweden (NAISS) at NSC Centre partially funded by the
the shape of the unit cell, while allowing for a larger scan step Swedish Research Council through Grant Agreement No.
along the c-axis. 2022-06725.

[1] A. A. El-Gendy, J. M. Barandiarán, and R. L. Hadimani, [7] K. X. Nguyen, J. Huang, M. H. Karigerasi, K. Kang, D. G.
Magnetic Nanostructured Materials (Elsevier, Amsterdam, Cahill, J.-M. Zuo, A. Schleife, D. P. Shoemaker, and P. Y.
2018). Huang, Angstrom-scale imaging of magnetization in antiferro-

[2] P. Welter, J. Rhensius, A. Morales, M. S. Wörnle, C.-H. magnetic Fe2As via 4d-STEM, Ultramicroscopy 247, 113696
Lambert, G. Puebla-Hellmann, P. Gambardella, and C. L. (2023).
Degen, Scanning nitrogen-vacancy center magnetometry in [8] N. Dekkers and H. de Lang, Differential phase contrast in a
large in-plane magnetic fields, Appl. Phys. Lett. 120, 074003 STEM, Optik (Jena) 41, 452 (1974).
(2022). [9] J. Chapman, P. Batson, E. Waddell, and R. Ferrier, The direct

[3] R. Wiesendanger, Spin mapping at the nanoscale and atomic determination of magnetic domain wall profiles by differential
scale, Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 1495 (2009). phase contrast electron microscopy, Ultramicroscopy 3, 203

[4] A. Kovács and R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, Magnetic Imaging of (1978).
Nanostructures Using Off-Axis Electron Holography (Elsevier, [10] T. Matsumoto, Y.-G. So, Y. Kohno, H. Sawada, R. Ishikawa, Y.
Amsterdam, 2018), Chap. 2, pp. 59–153. Ikuhara, and N. Shibata, Jointed magnetic skyrmion lattices at

[5] T. Tanigaki, T. Akashi, T. Yoshida, K. Harada, K. Ishizuka, a small-angle grain boundary directly visualized by advanced
M. Ichimura, K. Mitsuishi, Y. Tomioka, X. Yu, D. Shindo, Y. electron microscopy, Sci. Rep. 6, 35880 (2016).
Tokura, Y. Murakami, and H. Shinada, Electron holography [11] N. Shibata, S. D. Findlay, H. Sasaki, T. Matsumoto, H. Sawada,
observation of individual ferrimagnetic lattice planes, Nature Y. Kohno, S. Otomo, R. Minato, and Y. Ikuhara, Imaging of
(London) 631, 521 (2024). built-in electric field at a p-n junction by scanning transmission

[6] D. Song, Z. Wang, and J. Zhu, Magnetic measurement by elec- electron microscopy, Sci. Rep. 5, 10040 (2015).
tron magnetic circular dichroism in the transmission electron [12] S. McVitie, D. McGrouther, S. McFadzean, D. MacLaren,
microscope, Ultramicroscopy 201, 1 (2019). K. O’Shea, and M. Benitez, Aberration corrected Lorentz

134422-5



NEGI, VAN AKEN, AND RUSZ PHYSICAL REVIEW B 110, 134422 (2024)

scanning transmission electron microscopy, Ultramicroscopy [25] Y. Kohno, T. Seki, S. D. Findlay, Y. Ikuhara, and N. Shibata,
152, 57 (2015). Real-space visualization of intrinsic magnetic fields of an anti-

[13] M. Campanini, L. Nasi, F. Albertini, and R. Erni, Disentangling ferromagnet, Nature (London) 602, 234 (2022).
nanoscale electric and magnetic fields by time-reversal opera- [26] F. Křížek, S. Reimers, Z. Kašpar, A. Marmodoro, J. Michalička,
tion in differential phase-contrast STEM, Appl. Phys. Lett. 117, O. Man, A. Edström, O. J. Amin, K. W. Edmonds, R. P.
154102 (2020). Campion et al., Atomically sharp domain walls in an antifer-

[14] N. Shibata, S. D. Findlay, Y. Kohno, H. Sawada, Y. Kondo, and romagnet, Sci. Adv. 8, eabn3535 (2022).
Y. Ikuhara, Differential phase-contrast microscopy at atomic [27] N. Shibata, Y. Kohno, A. Nakamura, S. Morishita, T. Seki, A.
resolution, Nat. Phys. 8, 611 (2012). Kumamoto, H. Sawada, T. Matsumoto, S. D. Findlay, and Y.

[15] N. Shibata, S. D. Findlay, T. Matsumoto, Y. Kohno, T. Ikuhara, Atomic resolution electron microscopy in a magnetic
Seki, G. Sánchez-Santolino, and Y. Ikuhara, Direct visual- field free environment, Nat. Commun. 10, 2308 (2019).
ization of local electromagnetic field structures by scanning [28] N. Emery, E. J. Wildman, J. M. S. Skakle, G. Giriat, R. I. Smith,
transmission electron microscopy, Acc. Chem. Res. 50, 1502 and A. C. Mclaughlin, Giant magnetoresistance in oxypnictides
(2017). (La,Nd)OMnAs, Chem. Commun. 46, 6777 (2010).

[16] K. Müller, F. F. Krause, A. Béché, M. Schowalter, V. Galioit, [29] J. Rusz, Modified automatic term selection v2: A faster
S. Löffler, J. Verbeeck, J. Zweck, P. Schattschneider, and A. algorithm to calculate inelastic scattering cross-sections,
Rosenauer, Atomic electric fields revealed by a quantum me- Ultramicroscopy 177, 20 (2017).
chanical approach to electron picodiffraction, Nat. Commun. 5, [30] A. Edström, A. Lubk, and J. Rusz, Elastic scattering of electron
5653 (2014). vortex beams in magnetic matter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 127203

[17] J. A. Hachtel, J. C. Idrobo, and M. Chi, Sub-Ångstrom electric (2016).
field measurements on a universal detector in a scanning trans- [31] J. C. Loudon, Antiferromagnetism in NiO observed by trans-
mission electron microscope, Adv. Struct. 4, 10 (2018). mission electron diffraction, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 267204

[18] G. Sánchez-Santolino, N. R. Lugg, T. Seki, R. Ishikawa, S. D. (2012).
Findlay, Y. Kohno, Y. Kanitani, S. Tanaka, S. Tomiya, Y. [32] D. S. Negi, J. C. Idrobo, and J. Rusz, Probing the localization
Ikuhara et al., Probing the internal atomic charge density dis- of magnetic dichroism by atomic-size astigmatic and vortex
tributions in real space, ACS Nano 12, 8875 (2018). electron beams, Sci. Rep. 8, 4019 (2018).

[19] K. Müller-Caspary, F. F. Krause, T. Grieb, S. Löffler, M. [33] P. Schattschneider, S. Rubino, C. Hébert, J. Rusz, J. Kuneš, P.
Schowalter, A. Béché, V. Galioit, D. Marquardt, J. Zweck, P. Novák, E. Carlino, M. Fabrizioli, G. Panaccione, and G. Rossi,
Schattschneider, J. Verbeeck, and A. Rosenauer, Measurement Detection of magnetic circular dichroism using a transmission
of atomic electric fields and charge densities from average electron microscope, Nature (London) 441, 486 (2006).
momentum transfers using scanning transmission electron mi- [34] P. Schattschneider, B. Schaffer, I. Ennen, and J. Verbeeck, Map-
croscopy, Ultramicroscopy 178, 62 (2017). ping spin-polarized transitions with atomic resolution, Phys.

[20] H. Brown, N. Shibata, H. Sasaki, T. Petersen, D. Paganin, M. Rev. B 85, 134422 (2012).
Morgan, and S. Findlay, Measuring nanometre-scale electric [35] J. Rusz, S. Muto, J. Spiegelberg, R. Adam, K. Tatsumi, D. E.
fields in scanning transmission electron microscopy using seg- Bürgler, P. M. Oppeneer, and C. M. Schneider, Magnetic
mented detectors, Ultramicroscopy 182, 169 (2017). measurements with atomic-plane resolution, Nat. Commun. 7,

[21] T. J. Pennycook, A. R. Lupini, H. Yang, M. F. Murfitt, 12672 (2016).
L. Jones, and P. D. Nellist, Efficient phase contrast imag- [36] J. Rusz, J. Spiegelberg, S. Muto, T. Thersleff, M. Ohtsuka, K.
ing in stem using a pixelated detector. Part 1: Experimental Leifer, and P. M. Oppeneer, Localization of magnetic circular
demonstration at atomic resolution, Ultramicroscopy 151, 160 dichroic spectra in transmission electron microscopy experi-
(2015). ments with atomic plane resolution, Phys. Rev. B 95, 174412

[22] M. Krajnak, D. McGrouther, D. Maneuski, V. O’Shea, and (2017).
S. McVitie, Pixelated detectors and improved efficiency [37] D. Negi, P. M. Zeiger, L. Jones, J.-C. Idrobo, P. A. van Aken,
for magnetic imaging in stem differential phase contrast, and J. Rusz, Prospect for detecting magnetism of a single impu-
Ultramicroscopy 165, 42 (2016). rity atom using electron magnetic chiral dichroism, Phys. Rev.

[23] A. Lubk and J. Zweck, Differential phase contrast: An integral B 100, 104434 (2019).
perspective, Phys. Rev. A 91, 023805 (2015). [38] J. C. Idrobo, J. Rusz, J. Spiegelberg, M. A. McGuire, C. T.

[24] A. Edström, A. Lubk, and J. Rusz, Quantum mechanical treat- Symons, R. R. Vatsavai, C. Cantoni, and A. R. Lupini, Detect-
ment of atomic-resolution differential phase contrast imaging of ing magnetic ordering with atomic size electron probes, Adv.
magnetic materials, Phys. Rev. B 99, 174428 (2019). Struct. 2, 5 (2016).

134422-6



REVIEW
www.small-journal.com

2D Materials for Potable Water Application: Basic
Nanoarchitectonics and Recent Progresses
Pranay Ranjan,* Zhixuan Li, Arshiya Ansari, Shahzad Ahmed, Moin Ali Siddiqui,
Shizhuo Zhang, Shashikant P. Patole, Gary J. Cheng, El Hadi S. Sadki,* Ajayan Vinu,*
and Prashant Kumar*

1. Introduction
Water polluted by toxic chemicals due to waste from chemical/
pharmaceuticals and harmful microbes such as E. Coli bacteria The quality of the water we drink corre-
causes several fatal diseases; and therefore, water filtration is crucial for lates with our overall quality of life. Of the

1386 million km3 of water on the Earth, only
accessing clean and safe water necessary for good health. Conventional water 10.63 million km3 is freshwater, and just
filtration technologies include activated carbon filters, reverse osmosis, and 30.1% of that freshwater is groundwater.[1]

ultrafiltration. However, they face several challenges, including high energy Unfortunately, water is susceptible to sev-
consumption, fouling, limited selectivity, inefficiencies in removing certain eral contaminants that can adversely af-
contaminants, dimensional control of pores, and structural/chemical changes fect its safety for consumption. Contami-

at higher thermal conditions and upon prolonged usage of water filter. nations by waterborne pathogens and the
resulting diseases is a major global issue

Recently, the advent of 2D materials such as graphene, BN, MoS2, MXenes, impacting water quality.[2] Beyond biolog-
and so on opens new avenues for advanced water filtration systems. This ical pollutants, impurities such as dust,
review delves into the nanoarchitectonics of 2D materials for water filtration fine sand, mud, and soil also contami-
applications. The current state of water filtration technologies is explored, nate water. Rainwater, streams, and bore-
the inherent challenges they face are outlines, and the unique properties holes often contain acid and metallic rust

constituents. Many drinking water systems
and advantages of 2D materials are highlighted. Furthermore, the scope of also contain chlorine and excessive cal-
this review is discussed, which encompasses the synthesis, characterization, cium. Due to its composition of hydro-
and application of various 2D materials in water filtration, providing gen and oxygen, water can dissolve many
insights into future research directions and potential industrial applications. substances it encounters. Ingesting con-

taminated water can lead to diseases and

P. Ranjan, A. Ansari, S. Ahmed, M. A. Siddiqui S. Zhang
Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering The Institute of Technological Sciences
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur Wuhan University
Jodhpur, Rajasthan 342037, India Wuhan 430072, P. R. China
E-mail: pranay.ranjan@iitj.ac.in S. P. Patole
Z. Li, A. Vinu, P. Kumar Department of Physics
Global Innovative Centre for Advanced Nanomaterials (GICAN) Khalifa University of Science and Technology
College of Engineering Abu Dhabi 127788, UAE
Science and Environment (CESE) G. J. Cheng
School of Engineering School of Industrial Engineering
The University of Newcastle Purdue University
University Drive, Callaghan, New South Wales 2308, Australia West Lafayette, IN 47906, USA
E-mail: ajayan.vinu@newcastle.edu.au; E. H. S. Sadki
prashant.kumar@newcastle.edu.au Department of Physics

College of Science
United Arab Emirates University
Al-Ain 15551, UAE

The ORCID identification number(s) for the author(s) of this article E-mail: e_sadki@uaeu.ac.ae
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202407160

© 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH. This is an
open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial License, which permits use, distribution and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited
and is not used for commercial purposes.

DOI: 10.1002/smll.202407160

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (1 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

Figure 1. Pathogenic diseases aggravated by climatic hazards.[5]

medical conditions such as typhoid, malaria, cholera, dracuncu- logical conditions, overburden pressure and subterranean tem-
liasis, and diarrhea.[3] perature have transformed these organic materials into hydrocar-

Every year, a startling 3.4 million people die from water- bon molecules such as natural gas and crude oil. Petroleum is a
borne infections caused by consuming tainted water. Rivers con- complex mixture of various constituents, including monocyclic,
taminated with harmful microorganisms due to poor sanita- straight chained, branched, cyclic, and polycyclic aromatic hydro-
tion, inadequate wastewater treatment, and catastrophic flood- carbons. Oil pollution can significantly harm ecosystems, affect-
ing lead to widespread illness and death. The severity of this ing both plants and animals, and contaminating water supplies.
issue has led the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention The toxicity levels of oil in water can be assessed by determining
(CDC) to establish a specific division dedicated to addressing the hazardous potency of its constituents at water solvency.[6] Off-
tainted water in the United States. Biological pollutants in wa- shore areas worldwide, with significant economic potential, are
ter include pathogens, bacilli, viruses, protozoa, parasites, al- being explored and developed for petroleum resources. These re-
gae, and their cysts (eggs), contributed by living beings and gions include New Zealand, Alaska, Western Australia, Malaysia,
microbes in the environment.[4] These microorganisms, often re- the Caribbean Sea, Venezuela, the North Atlantic Ocean, Mex-
ferred to as germs, can proliferate at alarming rates (Figure 1). ico, West Africa, the North Sea, Brazil, the Caspian Sea, Cali-
Colloidal pollutants in water, such as amino acids and organic fornia, the Gulf of Mexico, Indonesia, Newfoundland, and the
matter, arise when water in lakes, rivers, and streams interacts South China Sea. The petroleum industry is actively investing
with suspended particles and materials such as sand, boulders, in the development and exploration of oil and gas fields in these
and biological matter, rendering the water impure and unfit for locations.
drinking. Despite the environmental protection measures imple- Arsenic (As) and fluoride are the two most common pollu-
mented in the previous century, they did not adequately support tants in the affected areas and populations.[7] In many nations,
the immense industrial revolution worldwide. Many cities are lo- As and fluoride naturally occur in groundwater. Due to their
cated near rivers, which serve as transportation hubs and water highly toxic nature and detrimental health effects even at low
sources. Unfortunately, these rivers are often exploited as sewage concentrations, arsenic and fluoride contamination of ground-
and wastewater dumping grounds. Pathogens are found in rivers water has become a major global environmental issue. Arsenic
for various reasons, including low sanitation standards and inef- concentrations in drinking water exceed World Health Organi-
ficient sewerage systems, which are common in many towns in zation (WHO) guidelines, affecting ≈200 million people world-
underdeveloped nations. However, even in developed nations, ex- wide. However, the most common groundwater contaminant is
treme flooding can lead to pathogen contamination of rivers. Due fluoride. Fluorosis, a condition caused by excessive fluoride in-
to global warming, such floods following heavy rains are becom- take, affects over 200 million individuals in 25 countries, includ-
ing increasingly frequent. ing China, India, and Bangladesh, with South-East Asian nations

Petroleum, commonly known as “rock oil,” is a fossil fuel being particularly hard hit.[8] In India, inhabitants of the mid-
that has formed beneath the Earth’s surface over millions of dle and lower Gangetic plains, as well as regions in Central and
years. It originates from the remains of extinct marine organ- South India with hard rock topography, are especially impacted
isms, including bacteria, plants, and algae. Under specific geo- by arsenic and fluoride poisoning.

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (2 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

Figure 2. Water purification techniques.

Microplastics, including those originating from the wear and least twice as high as among the poorest. Those who are under-
tear of car tires,[9] have emerged as a significant environmen- privileged or marginalized due to gender, age, nationality, or reli-
tal contaminant, especially in water systems. Tire wear parti- gious beliefs are also more likely to lack adequate sanitation and
cles, which are a form of microplastic, are generated during water.
the use of vehicles and are composed of synthetic rubber, poly- Having purified drinking water at home eliminates the need to
mers, and additives that can release toxic chemicals into the en- purchase expensive bottled water, significantly reducing monthly
vironment. These particles are small enough to enter waterways expenses. Water filtration equipment is a one-time investment
through runoff, eventually contaminating both freshwater and that lasts a long time, making the cost of a water purifier much
marine ecosystems. Studies have shown that microplastics can lower than the ongoing expense of buying water.
absorb and transport harmful pollutants, exacerbating their en- Various tried-and-true techniques[14] (Figure 2) that are highly
vironmental impact and posing risks to aquatic life and human effective for water purification include: a) Boiling: This is the sim-
health when present in drinking water sources.[10] Due to their plest method, where water is boiled for a considerable amount of
persistent nature and widespread occurrence, the removal of mi- time to kill microbes and viruses. However, boiling doesn’t re-
croplastics, including those from car tires, is a growing focus in move all contaminants, so the water must be passed through a
water treatment technologies. microporous screen to fully purify it.[15] b) Bleach Solution: For

Purified water is essential for everyone on Earth for drinking, emergency treatment, a weak bleach solution with 5% chlorine
cooking, and domestic tasks such as bathing, brushing teeth, and can be added to water. This acts as an oxidant, quickly disinfect-
washing clothes. Maintaining the hygiene of our environment ing the water and making it safe for consumption.[16] c) Iodine:
and promoting healthier lives is crucial. Despite its seemingly Available in liquid or tablet form, iodine is potent at eradicat-
clean appearance, tap water contains various germs and viruses ing viruses and bacteria. However, it imparts a bad taste and can
that can harm our well-being, as well as contaminants such as flu- be harmful in large amounts, so it should only be used when
orine compounds, lead, pesticides, chlorine, mercury, microplas- other filtration methods are unavailable.[17] d) Solar Purification:
tics and other waste products, primarily from various industries This is a method that uses the sun’s ultraviolet light to purify
(for example textile and pharmaceutical). Drinking polluted wa- water. Water is placed in a plastic container, shaken to release
ter can lead to severe health problems, including polio, dysentery, oxygen, and left in direct sunlight, effectively killing viruses and
typhoid, cholera, and diarrhea, causing up to 502 000 diarrhea- bacteria.[18] e) Distillation: This method involves collecting con-
related deaths annually.[11,12] Water purification is vital for main- densed water after evaporation. While effective, it is less effi-
taining a healthy and safe environment.[13] Removing chlorine cient than RO filters due to the time required and the removal
from water makes it safe to drink, and eliminating lead, which is of essential minerals.[18] f ) Clay Vessel Filters: This is an an-
particularly harmful to human health, improves digestion. Us- cient method still used in some rural areas, where clay pots fil-
ing filtered water regularly can also help with skin problems ter contaminated water by removing muck and allowing pure,
and improve air quality. Despite the critical need for clean wa- drinkable water to pass through. This method can also be used
ter, billions of people worldwide still lack access to it. Approx- for desalination.[19] g) Reverse Osmosis (RO) Purifiers: One of
imately 2.2 billion people do not have access to safe drinking the most effective methods, RO purifiers force water through
water, 4.2 billion lack sanitation facilities, and 3 billion lack ba- a semipermeable membrane to remove impurities.[20] h) Elec-
sic hand-hygiene facilities. Children and families in underdevel- tric Water Purifiers: Common in today’s households, these pu-
oped and rural areas are the most at risk. The analysis shows rifiers use a multistage process that includes UV and UF filtra-
that eight out of ten individuals living in rural regions lack ac- tion, carbon blocking, and modern purification technologies to
cess to essential services, and in one out of every four countries, produce the purest drinking water.[21] These methods vary in effi-
access to basic facilities among the wealthiest individuals is at ciency and practicality, but all contribute to making water safe for

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (3 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

drinking and other domestic uses, improving health and hygiene
for households worldwide. Traditional water filtration technolo-
gies, including activated carbon filters, reverse osmosis (RO),
and ultrafiltration (UF), have been instrumental in providing
potable water.[22] However, these technologies come with signifi-
cant drawbacks. Activated carbon filters, while effective in remov-
ing organic contaminants, have limited efficacy against heavy
metals and pathogens. Reverse osmosis, known for its ability
to desalinate water, is energy-intensive and prone to membrane
fouling. Ultrafiltration, although useful for removing particulates
and some pathogens, struggles with removing dissolved salts and
organic molecules.

The emergence of 2D materials, such as graphene, graphene
oxide, and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), has gar-
nered significant attention in the field of water filtration. These
materials possess unique structural and chemical properties, in-
cluding high surface area, tunable porosity, and exceptional me-
chanical strength, making them promising candidates for ad-
vanced filtration technologies. The ability to engineer these mate-
rials at the nanoscale—referred to as nanoarchitectonics—allows
for the design of highly efficient and selective filtration sys-
tems. In this review, we provide a comprehensive overview of the Figure 3. The family of 2D materials.[29]

nanoarchitectonics of 2D materials for water filtration. We begin
by examining the current landscape of water filtration technolo-
gies and the challenges they face. We then delve into the specific Recently, compound 2D materials, a new class of 2D materi-
advantages of 2D materials, such as their high permeability, anti- als, has been found and termed MXene[27-29] by Gogotsi[30] and
fouling properties, and the potential for functionalization to tar- termed MXene.[27,28] It consists of early transition metals (M)
get specific contaminants. The scope of this review includes the bound with carbon and nitrogen (X) and edge or surface termi-
synthesis methods, structural characterization, and application nated atoms (O, OH, F, and Cl). A typical MXene sheet can be
of various 2D materials in water filtration. Keeping track of the re- represented with Mn+1XnTx,[27,28] where Mn + 1 belongs to early
cent advancements and identifying future research directions, we transition metals, and n varies from one to three layers. Notably,
aim to provide a roadmap for the development of next-generation it was found that MXene was prepared using a precursor called
water filtration technologies leveraging the unique properties of the MAX phase, in which the M─A bond was metallic and chemi-
2D materials. cally stronger than M─X bonds. This unique layer property offers

selective etching of the elemental layer (A). 2D material chalco-
2. Evolution of 2D Materials and their genide comes under another class of flatlands, in which the layer
Heterostructures of the hexagonal plane is made up of transition metals (groups

IV–VII) and is sandwiched between layers of sulfur, selenium,
Owing to the commercial realization of 2D material-based prod- or tellurium by covalent bonding. Akin to graphene, the proper-
ucts and the constant unmatched effort from the researchers, 2D ties of its cousins, such as electrical, optical, thermal, mechani-
material research is in its infancy. Therefore, it is crucial to under- cal, and optoelectronic, are determined by the number of layers,
stand the existing flatland members and investigate their role in synthesis routes, and defect density. A list of 2D family mem-
membrane technology. The advent of graphene in 2004, consist- bers that the scientific community has widely accepted has been
ing of a hexagonally arranged atomically thick monolayer sheet summarized in Figure 3.[31] The inception of 2D hybrids or het-
of carbon[23–25] in the flatland, brought revolutionary changes in erostructures and the post graphene era open many unexplored
material science and condensed matter physics. The exfoliation properties in 2D materials. Heterostructures are categorized into
of graphene, an elemental sheet of carbon with exceptional physi- two types: a) lateral heterostructures (LHs) and b) vertical het-
cal and chemical properties, triggers curiosity amongst scientists erostructures (VHs).[32] LH is an elongation of the conventional
and researchers to look for other unexplored graphene cousins. heterostructure concept in the 2D regime. It consists of differ-
The recently found elemental analogs of graphene are from the ent 2D crystal bonding in a single atomic layer. LH is limited to
group III to V, known as Xenes.[26] The family of Xenes (X = Si, a few 2D materials as it allows marginal lattice mismatch in a
Ge, Sn, etc.) consists of an atomically thick layer of silicon (sili- single atomic crystalline sheet. For example, graphene and h-BN
cone), germanium (germanene), tin (stanine), lead (plumbene), have the same crystal structure and a lattice mismatch of 1.7%,
phosphorus (phosphorene), and boron (borophene).[27] Com- and together, they form LH in a single atomic layer. LH occurs
pared to planar graphene with sp2 hybridized carbon atoms and in transition metal di-chalcogenides (TMDCs) as its entire vari-
no dangling bonds, pseudo planar Xenes with sp2–sp3 hybridiza- ant has similar structures and almost the same lattice constant.
tion (electron–electron correlations) are promising candidates However, the evidence of LH via vapor phase deposition is lim-
for covalent functionalization owing to atoms or buckled (out of ited, which has been recently demonstrated by Huang et al.[33]

plane) atoms.[28] Heterostructures of 2D materials are an exploratory field and

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (4 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

materials such as MoS2–WS2, MoS2–MoSe2, MoTe2–WTe2, onto a substrate, thus making it difficult for industries to syn-
MoSe2–MoTe2, MoS2–WS2, and MoSe2–WSe2 are the most thesize 2D materials commercially.[47] The next advanced ver-
promising amongst 2D materials for LH. Understanding and re- sion of the CVD is metalorganic CVD (MOCVD), presently being
alizing LH-based membranes and their properties would also be used with high scientific interest owing to the ease in fabricating
interesting. However, at present, no studies or research has been 2D materials.[48–53] MBE and ALD are other techniques that can
initiated in this direction; thus, research in this field is yet to be produce a large atomistic graphene sheet or other 2D materials.
started to realize TMDc-based LH membranes. However, MBE involves a hydrocarbon decomposition reaction

VH comprises weak interlayer van der Waals bonding (out- and offers various substrates, including metal, semiconductors,
of-plane) and strong in-plane intralayer covalent bonding. and insulators, which CVD lags. ALD deposits ultrathin, high-
Compared to LH, VH gives more freedom to stacked 2D mate- quality substrates with atomic thickness using four steps: pre-
rials even though they belong to different families, for example, cursor exposure, purging, counter-reactant exposure, and purg-
graphene, hBN, TMDs, nitrides, and oxides. G–hBN, hBN–G, ing. The frequent exposure of the precursor to counter reactant
G–TMD, TMD–TMD, and G–hBN stack superlattices are some leads to a chemical reaction at the surface of the substrate; thus,
examples of VH, which have been investigated and shown great synthesis in ALD depends on the surface chemical reaction and
potential for applications in optoelectronics, thermal, and so on. reactive surface sites.
Mayorov et al.[34] demonstrated ballistic transport over tens of Recently, Mannix et al.[56] deposited the first-of-its-kind 2D
μm in the encapsulated h-BN–graphene-based heterostructure sheet of boron, namely borophene, via PVD. In a follow-up study,
systems at room temperature. The state-of-the-art device showed Feng et al.[57] deposited borophene via MBE. The typical 2D ma-
carrier fluctuations of ≈5 × 109 cm−2 and ballistic transport at a terial synthesis via different methods, including ALD and MBE
zero magnetic field owing to the noninteraction of the graphene is shown in Figure 4a,b.
with the polymer. Cao et al.[35] proved that an air-sensitive 2D The synthesis of 2D materials involves a range of methods,
material, such as NbSe2, can be protected from degradation each offering unique advantages and challenges. Among these,
using a heterostructured system. chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is one of the most widely used

The superior properties of heterostructures result in unprece- techniques due to its scalability and the high purity of the mate-
dented and enhanced physical and chemical properties as well as rials produced (Figure 5). While molecular beam epitaxy (MBE)
technological changes in membrane technology. However, their and physical vapor deposition (PVD) can also create 2D atomic
synthesis at the industrial or commercial level using existing sheets, CVD offers greater advantages in terms of quality and
techniques, such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD) or phys- scalability. Traditionally, top–down techniques, such as exfolia-
ical vapor deposition (PVD), is in its infancy. Therefore, realiz- tion, were used to synthesize single atomic layers, but these
ing these 2D material-based heterostructures containing optimal methods are limited by their inability to control material qual-
ingredients in a single material for novel device applications is ity and structure, particularly when creating nanopores. In con-
challenging and appealing. Hence, it is imperative to study the trast, bottom–up techniques like CVD offer greater control over
engineering or synthesis of 2D materials and their heterolayered the synthesis process, enabling the creation of 2D materials with
systems via a top–down or bottom–up approach for manufac- tunable properties and providing platforms for nanopore forma-
turing nanoporous membranes, as well as the associated chal- tion using chemicals. However, one limitation remains: achiev-
lenges (synthesis of a high-quality atomically thick crystalline ing control over the pore size in covalently bonded 2D sheets is
sheet of 2D materials, transfer of the 2D materials on to a sub- still a challenge with bottom–up techniques.
strate, control over high temperature, size, defects, and pore size A classic example of a nanoporous 2D sheet is graphene ox-
distribution).[36–43] ide (GO) and its hybrid forms, often combined with polymers

to enhance conductivity, mechanical strength, and flexibility. The
3. Synthesis of 2D Materials synthesis of GO typically involves the oxidation of graphite in an

acidic medium, resulting in functionalization with various chem-
Bottom–up techniques, including CVD, atomic layer deposition ical groups such as hydroxyl, carbonyl, and ether. Methods de-
(ALD), molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), and top–down microme- veloped by Brodie, Hummers, Hirata, Marcano, and others have
chanical exfoliation techniques, are also widely used in indus- been extensively used to produce GO,[59–62] particularly for mem-
tries for synthesizing atomically thick 2D materials. Synthesiz- brane filtration applications due to its cost-effectiveness. How-
ing graphene, TMDCs, h-BN, and so on, as a continuous layer via ever, GO’s poor mechanical strength, limited control over func-
CVD has already been reported. However, the first report on the tional groups, and the release of toxic gases during synthesis pose
large-area synthesis of a uniform graphene sheet on a copper foil significant challenges for industrial scalability. In addition, the
by Li et al.[44] in 2009 brings up the revolutionary change in real- ecotoxicological effects and fouling issues limit its broader use
izing the potential application of graphene in electronics indus- in filtration membranes.
tries. This breakthrough innovation was soon utilized by com- High material quality and crystallinity are usually achieved via
panies such as Samsung[45] and Sony,[46] where graphene sheets CVD or MOCVD. However, the transfer method of 2D materi-
with a length of 30 in. and 100 m were fabricated, respectively, als on the substrate (for supporting membrane) creates defects,
via roll-to-roll transfer technology. CVD provides high-quality, im- such as wrinkles and folding,[63–66] owing to the dry or wet trans-
pervious, and large graphene domains with a high growth rate fer methods. The transfer techniques involve dry stamping or
and reproducibility. However, CVD utilizes toxic and corrosive coating with the polymer,[67,68] which allows 2D materials to stick
gases, leading to a wrinkled graphene sheet if the temperature on the polymer, and then, followed by lift-off or through careful
is not controlled introducing defects while transferring the film pealing; the polymer will get etched by the solvents.[67,68] This

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (5 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

Figure 4. a) 2D material synthesis via ALD. Reproduced with permission.[54] Copyright 2020, Elsevier. b) MBE. Reproduced with permission.[55] Copyright
2019, Wiley.

process leads to inevitable contamination[69] of the 2D materi- metal–organic CVD (MOCVD) methods typically produce ma-
als and makes 2D materials prone to functionalization. To over- terials with high crystallinity and material quality, transfer tech-
come such challenges, CVD techniques are currently used to de- niques such as dry stamping or polymer-assisted wet transfer in-
posit atomic 2D sheets directly on the porous substrate.[70] The troduce defects like wrinkles and contamination.[63–66] These im-
creation of 2D compound materials by CVD has made signifi- perfections often require post-synthesis functionalization, which
cant strides so far. The nonmetal and metal precursors, substrate complicates the process.
architecture, temperature, and gas flux are all important factors To overcome the limitations of each technique, a combination
that affect the CVD growth operation. To realize the controlled of top–down and bottom–up approaches may offer a balanced
fabrication of 2D compound materials, ranging from binary and pathway for the scalable synthesis of 2D materials. For instance,
ternary to even more complex materials, it is crucial to have a top–down methods provide high selectivity, enhanced perme-
thorough grasp of these factors and the growth mechanism. The ability, and chemical stability, while bottom–up approaches offer
probability of using the nanoporous membrane for filtration is cost-effectiveness and control over the material’s atomic struc-
in the bottom–up technique owing to its cost-effectiveness, but it ture. However, this blended technique has yet to be fully realized
has many limitations, such as no control over functionalization, and developed for practical applications. CVD remains the most
pore size, and density. Therefore, a proper mixture of top–down promising method for depositing 2D atomic sheets directly onto
(high selectivity, enhanced permeability, less fouling, chemical porous substrates, especially for filtration membranes, but fur-
stability, and overall cost-to-benefit) and bottom–up techniques ther refinement is needed to control porosity and functionality.
for synthesizing 2D materials may be used for scalable synthesis
and control over porosity. 4. Properties of 2D Materials

Beyond CVD, other bottom–up synthesis methods include
liquid-phase exfoliation,[71] laser-based synthesis,[72] hydrother- The conventional membrane and techniques (boiling, sedimen-
mal/solvothermal synthesis,[73] mechanical exfoliation,[74] elec- tation, distillation, and chemical disinfectants) for water purifica-
trochemical exfoliation,[75] and microwave exfoliation,[76] each tion have become obsolete due to the ever-growing demand for
capable of producing high-quality 2D materials. While CVD or pure water or potable water.[77] Membrane technology working

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (6 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

Figure 5. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technique reported for various 2D. Reproduced with permission.[58] Copyright 2021, American Chemical
Society.

on pressure-driven mechanisms such as ultra or nanofiltration and desired size of pores. TEM is the most used technique
techniques, respectively as well as on reverse osmosis is deemed to achieve the pore size in 2D materials as it allows to kick
to fulfill the potable water demand.[78] out of a single atom or remove atom by atom in an in situ

The inception of graphene and its analog in the last decade experiment. This technique opens up the prospect of realizing
opened up a new potential opportunity for 2D materials in the graphene-based nanoporous membranes but fails to deliver
use of membrane technology. However, the synthesis techniques the same to other 2D materials. The other 2D materials (espe-
for only the graphene-based membranes have been extensively cially MoS2, BN, etc.) are more sensitive to electron irradiation
explored and its application in membrane technologies has and get contaminated due to the generation of carbon atoms
been practically realized for water desalination and filtration as ad-atoms in the in situ experiments.[90,91] Contamination
(Figure 6). A typical graph representing the average diameter of other 2D materials[92,93] is a huge challenge to overcome,
of the most commonly found bacteria in water flavobacterium, therefore, this technique has lost its glory for becoming a front-
micro bacterium to lactobacillus and cytophaga, and diameter of runner technique for the industrial production of nanoporous
the some of the common toxic ions such as potassium, sodium, membranes. The other technique which has been used for
aluminum, and calcium, is are represented in Figures 6a and 6b, making nanopores is the ion-bombardment technique.[94,95]

respectively. To realize pore size at the nanoscale, heavy-ion However, ion-bombardment techniques have very poor control
bombardment (IB) and etching (plasma or ozone treatment) over pore sizes diameter, density, and arrangements; thus, the
techniques have been utilized but it leads to the random gen- use of ion-bombardment techniques for making nanoporous
eration of pore size of various diameters.[79–81] In contrast to membranes gets obsolete. Focused ion beam (FIB) is the next
IB, the focused ion beam (FIB)[82–87] and the transmission promising technique used for making nanoporous membranes,
electron microscope (TEM)[79,80,88,89] produce fine, accurate, and indeed, it delivers the promise it holds. It uses various (Ga+,

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (7 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

Figure 6. List of a) Hydrated toxic ions along with their diameter and b) bio-fouling causing bacterial species with their average diameter respectively.
c) The contact angle and d) surface energy of various 2D materials and heterostructures. e) 2D materials with their Young’s modulus and f) breaking
strength and thickness of 2D materials.

Ar+, or He+ atoms) atoms to dislocate or remove the atoms in the increase in surface charge; thus, decreasing membrane strength
atomic arrangement of 2D materials.[96] It has been used in the and stability. The dielectric breakdown has also been used vastly
low-energy regime (in comparison to TEM) and primarily uses as another technique for making nanopores using voltages
a different size of atoms to generate desired pore size. A helium to the thin membranes in a solution of an electrolyte.[98,99] It
ion microscope has been used to achieve the pore size of 5–30 gains popularity due to the creation of sub-nm pore size at
nm in graphene.[89] It has also been tested to create nanopores laboratory scale experiments, but it lags greatly in controlling
of less than 5 nm in MoS2 and BN. This technique has been the position of the pores and their geometry. It should be
deemed to be the next potential method for making nanopores noted down that the use of the different methods for making
in membranes at an industrial scale. The next technique for nanopores should be implemented after having an in-depth un-
generating nanopores at the nanoscale is lithography; however, derstanding of the 2D materials, their composition, toxicity, and
creating a pore size of less than 16 nm is a challenge and has performance-dependent relation of the 2D nanoporous mem-
not been achieved to date. Some hybrids technique has been brane in accordance to mechanical strength, surface energy, and
used for making nanopores less than 16 nm and involves the hydrophobicity. The above-mentioned features of 2D materials
use of polymer mask and e-beam lithography, followed by dry are of utmost importance to prevent their further deterioration
etching.[97] In addition to this, the pore sizes in membranes and to enhance their efficiency as a membrane. It is therefore
created by sputtering or plasma etching have also been tuned imperative to study the physical properties of 2D materials and
by defocused ion irradiation.[92,93] However, this all leads to an their toxicity. Besides the ideal pore size, the surface energy of the

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (8 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

material also plays a crucial role in removing fouling from the different values of Young’s modulus and its value varies three
water because fouling is a phenomenon that is inevitable and can times (almost) when compared to each direction of Young’s
be realized everywhere a bacteria can be found. Therefore, any modulus. Boron nitride, another member of the graphene
kind of perturbation or defect in 2D materials can lead to the ac- family, and also known as white graphene has almost the same
cumulation of foreign analytes and decrease the performance of mechanical strength in comparison to graphene. Moreover, the
the membrane (low permeability, short membrane life, etc.). The next big upcoming challenge for the 2D nanoporous membrane
foulants are very less likely to adhere on a surface that has low is toxicity as to find immense application in water filtration, they
friction, roughness, and less hydrophobicity (Figure 6c). Fouling need to have a minimal toxic nature to humans as well as to the
(such as biological, colloidal, organic, and scaling) severely de- environment. It is, therefore, imperative to investigate its cyto-
stroys the performance of the membrane and increases the need toxic nature to humans and manage the risk of health hazards or
for chemical cleaning, which after enhancing the permeance, biological systems or ecosystems. However, little knowledge and
degrades or shortens the membrane life, while simultaneously research are available on the potential adversity and toxicity of
increasing the maintenance cost and energy consumption of 2D materials to humans. It is therefore vital to summarize and
membranes. The realization of low fouling material is always understand its cytotoxic nature, thus playing safe by choosing a
the need of the hour; a comparison between 2D materials and potential preventive approach (Table 1).[104–114] Transition metal
their heterostructures surface energy has been done (Figure 6d) dichalcogenides, graphene, boron nitride, and black phosphorus
and the prospect of heterostructures-based membranes due to toxicity have been discussed based on their synthesis protocol.
low surface energy was proposed to have a plethora of exciting It is evident that the chemical route has a much larger impact
and emerging opportunities in the realization of the nanoporous on human health in comparison to mechanical or liquid phase
membrane (considering the control over lattice mismatch and exfoliation techniques. Moreover, amongst all 2D families being
strain). An elemental sheet of TMDCs heterostructures such as compared, graphene poses no toxic behavior, which may be
MoS2/WS2, MoS2/WS2/BN, WS2/BN, and MoS2/BN on SiO2/Si attributed to the carbon constituents. Thus, it can be easily fore-
as a free-standing sheet is proposed to have an anisotropic ar- casted that graphene-based membrane or their heterostructures
rangement of atoms, however, its deposition on a substrate leads are the future materials for membranes used in water filtration
to a significant decrease in the surface energy when compared technology.
to BN, graphene, BP, MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and so on monolayer
atomic sheet. The next surprising and most advantageous fea- 5. Types of Membrane
ture of having heterostructures is realized in the case of surface
energy graphene sheets on SiO2/Si and individual graphene Membranes are fine-knitted thin barriers that selectively permit
sheets. It is found that a 3232-graphene sheet possesses a surface desired species to transit (permeate) and concurrently restrict un-
energy of nearly ≈75 mJ m−2; while, its heterostructures have a desired species (selectivity) from passing through them.[115–117]

surface energy of ≈575 mJ m−2; this phenomenon is attributed Concentration gradient, pressure difference, and temperature
to relaxation in strain and to the lattice match of the sheet with change are some factors that drive permeance. An evident change
the substrate. It is evident from the figure that boron nitride and advancement in membrane technology (increased through-
has the lowest surface energy followed by black phosphorus and put, energy efficiency, low toxicity, compactness, low cost, and
graphene. The surface energy of TMDc is almost three times environment friendliness)[117] have been observed over the past
in comparison to atomic sheets of BN and BP. However, het- few decades, implementing membrane technology in industries
erostructures outperform the 2D materials family by enormous such as pharmaceuticals, petrochemical, water desalination, gas
margins and mark their presence for potential application in separation, water filtration, wastewater treatment, hemodialysis,
upcoming future membrane technologies. The mechanical sta- bioprocessing, biotechnology, food processing, energy harvest-
bility of the 2D membrane (Figure 6e) varies with the thickness ing, fuel cells, and nitrogen generation.[118–145] However, some
of the sheet (Figure 6f). The mechanical strength of 2D mate- of the challenges that persist in membrane technology hinder
rials varies in two directions, that is, Ya and Yb. It is therefore its applications in industry, including difficulty in controlling the
crucial to understand the mechanical and breaking strength of sensitivity and selectivity of the membrane material, reduction in
the atomic sheets in both directions (Ya and Yb) to withstand fouling, less lifetime, high cost, robust performance in extreme
abrasion and high pressure. Graphene, the first entrant into the conditions, and toxicity of the membrane material.
flatland family, has the highest Young’s modulus of 338 Gpa The following Table 2 provides a comprehensive overview of
and sustains the strain of ≈25%.[100] Pores and defects lead to a various membrane materials, their typical pore sizes, and their
decrease in the mechanical strength of graphene atomic sheets impact on water filtration efficiency. It includes traditional poly-
with many orders of magnitudes.[101,102] However, graphene on a meric membranes as well as recent developments in 2D mate-
supporting substrate has still good enough mechanical strength rials, highlighting how these advances are shaping the future of
to withhold high pressure. It is calculated that an atomic sheet water purification technologies.
of supported (on a 1 μm pores substrate) graphene nanoporous Varieties of atomically thin sheets have been developed, nick-
membrane can stand at a pressure of 570 bar.[103] Analogous named as 2D materials, and they exhibit quantum nature in
to graphene, the 2D family also possesses sufficiently very several domains.[160–171] While the most explored 2D material
high mechanical strength and has been compared. It is evident is graphene, which is semi-metallic in nature and exhibits sev-
from Figure 6 that Xenes (germanene, silicone) possess almost eral superlative physical and chemical properties,[172–176] electri-
equivalent mechanical strength in both directions. However, cally insulating boron nitride is structurally and chemically ro-
phosphorene (another family member of Xene) has two striking bust. These two materials have now been commercialized and

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (9 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

Table 1. Toxicity of 2D materials.

Materials Synthesis Exposure Toxicity Species/cell type Refs.
method

MoS2 Chemical Cell culture ≈50% viability for A549 cell exposed Human lung carcinoma epithelial [104–107]
to 400 ppm nanosheets (400 × cells (A549)

≈4.5)
MoS2 Liquid phase exfoliation Cell culture ≥80% viability up to 50 μg mL−1 Human bronchial cells (BEAS-2B) [104]

and the human (THP-1)
MoS2 Mechanical exfoliation Cell culture ≥80% viability up to 48 h Human epithelial kidney cells [108]

(HEK293F)
MoS2 Chemical vapor Cell culture ≥80% viability up to 48 h Human epithelial kidney cells [108]

deposition (HEK293F)
WS2 Mechanical exfoliation Cell culture ≥80% viability up to 48 h Human epithelial kidney cells [108]

(HEK293F)
WS2 Liquid phase exfoliation Cell culture No loss of viability up to 100 μg mL−1 HeLa (human cervical cancer cell [109]

line), 4t1 (mouse breast cancer
cell line) and (human embryonic

kidney) cell
WS2 High temperature Cell culture ≥70% viability up to 200 μg mL−1 Reticuloendothelial system (RES) [110]

solution phase such as liver and spleen in mice
exfoliation

TiS2 High temperature Cell culture ≥75% viability up to 200 μg mL−1 Reticuloendothelial system (RES) [111]
solution phase such as liver and spleen in mice

exfoliation
h-BN Liquid phase exfoliation Cell culture No loss of viability up to 100 μg mL−1 HeLa (human cervical cancer cell [109]

line), 4t1 (mouse breast cancer
cell line), and (human embryonic

kidney) cell
BP Bulk Cell culture 8% viability (WST-8) 34% viability Cancer cells [112]

(MTT) at 50 μg mL−1

BP Liquid phase exfoliation Cell culture ≥80% viability up to 48 h Skin keratinocytes [113]
Graphene Few-layer graphene Cell culture No significant effects were observed Tumor-bearing mice [114]

after 24h
TiS2 Nanosheet (bottom–up Cell culture Mouse mammary gland cancer cells Tumor-bearing mice [111]

solution-phase (4T1)
method)

Table 2. Pore sizes across membrane materials for water filtration.

Filtration type Pore size Materials Filtration efficiency Refs.

Microfiltration 0.1–10 μm PP, PES, PVDF, PTFE Removes large particulates, bacteria, and [147,148]
protozoa. Allows passage of viruses and

dissolved salts.
Ultrafiltration 0.01–0.1 μm PAN, PS, cellulose acetate, PVDF Removes viruses, proteins, and colloids. [149–151]

Permits passage of smaller organic
molecules and ions.

Nanofiltration 0.001–0.01 μm TFC, polyamide, 2D graphene oxide (GO) Removes multivalent ions (Ca2+, Mg2+), [152–154]
small organic compounds (herbicides).

Limited removal of monovalent ions.
Reverse osmosis <0.001 μm TFC, polyamide, 2D molybdenum Removes nearly all dissolved solids, salts, [155–157]

disulfide (MoS2), 2D COFs heavy metals, and small organic
molecules. It is ideal for desalination.

Forward osmosis <0.001 μm Cellulose triacetate (CTA), TFC, 2D Similar to RO, but energy-efficient due to [158,159]
MXenes osmotic pressure. There is high selectivity

for salts and small organics.

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (10 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

available at industrial scale at economic cost. They provide an nal review articles (in 2D materials nanoporous membrane tech-
opportunity to overcome the challenges faced by bulk materi- nology) have been reported for understanding the functionality,
als because in their pristine state, they debar the analytes with mechanism, and fabrication of the nanoporous membrane tech-
a size bigger than a proton to pass through them owing to nology, but a void has been realized from the perspective of sci-
their unique atomic arrangements in their lattice (d < ≈5–10 entific challenges (synthesis, physical, and chemical properties)
Å).[55–58] Monoelemental atomic sheets (Xenes) such as metal- faced by the new member of the 2D family as well as the role
lic sheets of borophene,[177–179] molybdenene,[180] berylline,[181] of blended 2D materials/hybrids in water filtration. A number of
goldene,[182] phosphorene,[183] silicene,[184] germanene,[185] tran- review papers based on 2D materials membranes for water filtra-
sition metal oxides,[163,186–193] and 2D Nitrides[168,194] have been tion has been documented.[216–221] The effect of filter pore size,
developed. These 2D materials have been atomistically engi- 2D material crystallographic structure, and electrostatic/van der
neered via 3D Straining,[195] 2D–2D hybridization,[196–198] and Waals interactions between pathogens/contaminants and filter
substitutional doping.[199–201] These 2D materials have been em- materials on filtration efficiency is depicted in Figure 8. More-
ployed for several frontier applications.[169,202–208] Anti-oxidative over, it envisages the role of flatland (graphene [planar], Xenes
nature[209] due to chemical inertness and cooling features[210] [pseudoplanar], their cousins) members and the potential role
arising from high thermal conductivity are significant ones to of flatland hybrids in water filtration. A summary of the cur-
mention. rent technological development in scalable synthesis and intrin-

Unlike ceramics, zeolites, and polymers, which limit de- sic properties (such as surface energy, toxicity, high mechani-
signing defect control at bulk, these 2D materials offer precise cal strength, hydrophobicity, and the dependency of breaking
defect control, frictionless transport, high permeability, high strength on the thickness and pore size) of the flatland members
sensitivity, selectivity, low surface energy, and freedom to tailor have been reported. It also emphasizes the significant progress,
dangling bonds (for attachment of tunable functionalities) at problems, and challenges made in the development of state-of-
the atomic level; thus, making facile synthesis of nanoporous the-art membrane technology for nanoporous atomically thin
2D-membranes possible. Zeolites, while widely used in filtration membranes. Moreover, in the end, a perspective has been pre-
due to their highly ordered porous structures and effective sented to foster a solution to numerous futuristic engineered
ion-exchange capabilities, are limited in tunability compared nanoporous membranes.
to 2D materials.[211] They excel at removing contaminants such In addition to commonly studied 2D materials such as
as heavy metals and ammonia from water but lack the atomic- graphene and MXenes, silicates[222] and 2D zeolites[223] also rep-
level precision that allows for more versatile and customizable resent an important class of materials with significant potential
filtration. Industrial-scale 2D-material membranes seemed in water purification applications. Natural and synthetic silicates,
challenging when 2D materials were first discovered. In 2013, due to their unique layered structures and ion exchange capabil-
Lockheed Martin discovered a revolutionary membrane technol- ities, are highly effective in removing a wide range of contami-
ogy (at the commercial level) based on graphene called Perforene. nants from water.[224] Their porous frameworks allow for selec-
It was used in the desalination process for obsolete salts and tive filtration, making them ideal for trapping heavy metals and
ions (sodium, chlorine, etc.) from seawater, resulting in fresh organic pollutants. Similarly, 2D zeolites, which are derived from
drinking water.[212] Thereafter, the same technology was realized traditional zeolites but exist as ultrathin sheets, exhibit enhanced
in the purification of oil wastewater. This experimental obser- surface area and permeability, making them efficient for appli-
vation, once addressed, evokes the ability of graphene cousins cations such as molecular sieving and desalination.[225,226] These
(yet limited) to provide a more facile fabrication of nanoporous materials possess a high degree of tunability, allowing for modi-
membranes technology. Later on, Arvia technology (UK-based fications in pore size and surface chemistry to optimize their per-
firm) and Nyex (Manchester University) stepped up to make formance for specific contaminants. Their natural abundance,
membranes to eliminate other challenges such as organic com- chemical stability, and environmentally friendly nature further
pounds and fouling properties.[212] According to IUPAC, the pore underscore their importance in developing sustainable water fil-
sizes (d) <0.2 nm, 0.2–2 nm, and >50 nm have been categorized tration technologies.
as nanoporous, mesoporous, and macroporous membranes, The filtration properties of membranes depend on porosity
respectively.[213–215] Moreover, based on the filtration process (pore size and pore length), material constituents, surface en-
type, membrane technology is further classified into reverse ergy, mechanical strength, and hydrophobicity.[213,227] Mass re-
osmosis (0.1–1 nm), nanofiltration (1–10 nm), ultrafiltration sistance to molecules was often achieved in conventional mem-
(2–100 nm), and microfiltration (0.1–10 μm).[214,215] Therefore, to branes via membrane structure and porosity. High permeance
develop a perspective for pressure-driven water-based filtration is controlled by tuning the porosity density. However, some an-
technologies (Figure 7), a relationship between the target species alyte dissolves and passes through the pore length, limiting the
and corresponding pore size has been summarized. As the use of the conventional membrane.[228–230] The traditional mem-
working principle of water filtration and gas separation is the brane water filtering method worked well for larger pathogens,
same, the membranes designed for water filtration in industries such as bacteria and protozoa. However, owing to the miniature
are often used for separating the admixture of gas molecules. size of the viruses 20–100 nm range, the traditional membrane
Therefore, we limited the scope of this review only to water filters could not remove them. Thus, the adsorbing surface was
filtration, and common terminologies between water and gas employed to sieve the tainted water to eliminate viruses using
filtration are defined as needed. electrostatic forces, including hydrophobic interactions, electro-

Presently, graphene rules the nanoporous membrane indus- static forces, and van der Waals forces. This virus is responsi-
tries; soon its cousins or analogs will challenge it. Few semi- ble for many water-borne illnesses. As the adsorption interface

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (11 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

Figure 7. Basic features of commonly used water treatment membrane.[146]

of the filtering screen is positively charged, it attracts negatively have thermal stability and are prone to fouling and hydrophobic-
charged viruses. In this manner, polluted water is filtered out. En- ity loss. Merkel et al.[241] proposed a nanocomposite (polymer and
hancing the electrostatic interaction, chemical affinity, and me- silica) matrix membrane with a reverse-selective mechanism for
chanical strength in the membrane are ways to restrict the an- high permeance. Moreover, the polymeric matrix was hybridized
alyte flow through the membrane.[212,213] Contrary to the con- with 2D materials (Li et al., Putz et al., and An et al.)[242–244] to over-
ventional membrane, in the nanoporous membrane with pores come the drawbacks of plasticization and thermal stability. How-
sizes of 2–100 nm, diffusivity depends on the molecular or so- ever, Robenson et al.[245,246] proposed that for PM, there is a trade-
lution gradient; selectivity is controlled by diffusion rate, layer off between permeance and selectivity; as permeance increases,
thickness, surface charge, membrane porosity, structure, chemi- selectivity decreases and vice-versa, limiting PM in membrane
cal bonding, steric effects, electrostatic interactions, and dielec- technology. Thus, the aim was to search for a suitable membrane
tric effects.[213,227] Various membranes have been synthesized that can overcome the trade-off between permeance and selectiv-
and developed for filtration (Figure 9).[231–238] Polymeric mem- ity of PM. Carbon molecular sieves (CMS), being an inorganic
branes (PMs) (first membrane generation) are vital in water pu- material, have demonstrated the potential to overcome the upper
rification (reverse, microfiltration, nanofiltration, and ultrafiltra- limit and attenuate the challenges (plasticization and deforma-
tion), fuel cells, and batteries owing to their control over the selec- tion at high temperature and pressure)[247] faced by PM, which
tive transport of ions or molecules, low cost, and flexibility. The is proposed to be the front-runner in nanoporous membrane fil-
most often used polymeric membranes are cellulose acetate (CA), tration technology.[248] CMS is synthesized via carbonizing poly-
cellulose triacetate (CTA), polysulfone (PSf), polydimethylsilox- meric precursors in a vacuum at high temperatures (773.15–
ane (PDMS), polyamides (PA), polycarbonate (PC), polyaniline 1273.15 K, pyrolysis), effusing all gaseous contents in polymers.
(PANI), and so on.[239,240] The exact composition of molecules Upon cooling, micropores or ultra-micropores appear (naturally)
or ions in transport is often ambivalent and relies on the com- with a dimensional shrinkage and considerable weight loss. In
plexity of the PM structure and the pressure dynamics that facil- short, CMS constitutes microporous or ultra-microporous pores
itate transport. Water molecules do not attack PMs, which do not on amorphous carbon membranes. The production cost of CMS

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (12 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

Figure 8. Crucial parameters determining filtration efficiency.

membrane is nearly three times that of PM, and CMS is brittle ence of an aqueous electrolyte. The chemical composition of the
in nature.[249–251] electrolyte decides the structure and morphology of the alumina.

Often, oxidation is a curse to materials, but sometimes it can be If the used electrolyte has a pH of 5–7, such as borate, citrate, and
a blessing. The natural oxidation of aluminum (thickness = 2–3 adipate,[255,256] it will lead to nonporous type barrier aluminum
nm) is a blessing rather than a curse as it prevents aluminum oxide. Contrary to this, a porous oxide film is formed if the pH is
from getting further oxidized. Buff et al.[252] reported the first acidic, such as phosphoric, malonic, tartaric, or chromic.[256,257]

synthesis of electrochemically oxidized alumina, which is called Porous anodized* aluminum oxide (AAO) membrane is the next
anodization.[253,254] In practice, anodization occurs in the pres- exploratory membrane technology (besides PM and CMS). The

aspect ratio of pore diameter to pore length in AAO can reach up
to 1:1000. AAO offers precise pore size retention, pore density,
and pore length and does not have any extractable organics. It
also offers stability to various organic solvents. However, its filtra-
tion properties heavily rely on interpore distance and diameters,
layer thickness, breakdown of glowing oxides, surface defects, the
electrolyte used for synthesis, and more.[258–260] AAO often loses
its permeance owing to degradation influenced by the pH of the
solvent, which increases in basic media (major obstacle); hence,
it needs further development.

The upcoming potential membrane materials for water fil-
tration are carbon nanotube membranes (CNT), and they offer
many unique and interesting properties, such as mechanical,
thermal, electrical, and chemical properties, as well as of its large
surface area, ease of functionalization, high aspect ratio, and fast
water transport. CNT is a hollow cylindrical graphene sheet. It
may or may not be limited to monolayer folding; thus, it has
been categorized into single-wall CNT (SWCNT) and multi-wall

Figure 9. Existing membrane technology concerning the structure of CNT (MWCNT). MWCNTs comprise multiple graphene layers
membranes. rolled in a hollow cylindrical shape. Dai et al., Li et al., Nasrabadi

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (13 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

et al., and Joseph et al.[261–264] have extensively used SWCNTs and cating a nanoporous 2D membrane provides one unique solu-
MWCNTs to desalinate seawater and brackish water. CNTs of- tion to overcome all existing challenges in filtration technology.
fer enhanced antifouling behavior, strength, rejection, and per- The synthesis of 2D materials or their heterostructures and the
meability as fillers in various membranes.[265] However, the ma- fabrication of the nanoporous membrane from 2D materials or
jor drawbacks of CNT membranes are the synthesis of verti- flatlands for water filtration at an industrial scale is the next im-
cally aligned CNT membranes at an industrial scale and the portant fact to understand, which we now discuss.
coagulation of CNTs owing to van der Waals’s forces in bucky 2D membranes have gained significant interest due to their
paper membranes. Dumee et al.[266] proposed the first bucky potential to deliver precise filtration, challenging current desali-
paper CNT concept in 2010 and analyzed its potential perfor- nation platforms. Sapkota et. al. demonstrated that molybde-
mance by blending CNTs with polymers to enhance filtration num disulfide (MoS2) laminar membranes have superior sta-
and increase permeance.[267] However, successful fine particle fil- bility in aqueous environments compared to extensively studied
tration was demonstrated with CNT membranes by Viadero Jr graphene-based membranes. However, challenges such as low
et al.[268] Commercial availability, cost reduction, toxicity, control ion rejection for high salinity water, low water flux, and limited
over suitable pore size, and distribution challenges further en- stability over time hinder their adoption as a viable technology.
hance the obstacle of CNT membranes for water filtration. The Composite laminate multilayer MoS2 membranes with stacked
failure of CNTs marled the rising of metal–organic framework heterodimensional one- to two-layer-thick, porous nanosheets,
(MOF) membranes. The MOF framework comprised metal ions and nanodisks have been reported. These membranes feature a
and bridged organic ligands.[233,269–271] Compared to other mem- multimodal porous network with tunable surface charge, pore
branes (PM, CMS, CNT, and AAO), MOFs offer pore size tun- size, and interlayer spacing. In forward osmosis, these mem-
ability, superlative selectivity, high permeability, and increased branes reject more than 99% of salts at high salinities, and in re-
active adsorption sites.[272] MOFs are divided into three cate- verse osmosis, they efficiently filter small-molecule organic dyes
gories: a) metal carboxylate, b) metal azolate, and c) functional- and salts. In addition, these membranes operate stably for over
ized MOFs.[273,274] The first two MOFs are composed of hard acid a month, suggesting their potential for commercial water purifi-
metal ions, such as Cr3+, Al3+, Fe3+, and Zr4+,[275–277] while the cation applications (Figure 10a–d)[283] A comprehensive compar-
latter comprises soft base azolate ligands (imidazolates, pyrazo- ison of water permeability and ion rejection rates has been stud-
lates, triazolates, and tetrazolates) and soft acid metal ions, such ied in detail by Cao et. al. across various 2D materials, includ-
as Zn2+, Cu2+, Ni2+, Mn2+, and Ag+.[278] Despite having water- ing MoS2, graphene, phosphorene, boron nitride, and MoSe2.
stable membranes (wastewater treatment and water regenera- (Figure 10e)[284] Molecular dynamics simulations demonstrated
tion), MOFs lag in design and synthesis strategies, defect control, that, among 2D materials with the same pore size, single-layer
recyclability, low production cost, and environmental toxicity. MoS2 consistently outperformed graphene by 27%, phosphorene

Carbon nanomembranes are yet another membrane filtra- by 38%, BN by 35%, and MoSe2 by 20% in water permeability
tion technology (after CMS) that utilizes amorphous carbon while maintaining an ion rejection rate greater than 99%. The
(diamond-like) and have been implemented in membrane tech- outstanding performance of MoS2 was attributed to a combina-
nology owing to their unprecedented mechanical strength and tion of water structure and dynamics near the membrane sur-
chemical inertness. Although Karan et al.[279] demonstrated face, energy barriers, and water packing and velocity inside the
carbon-based nanomembrane for filtration, the real-time applica- nanopore.
tion of carbon nanomembranes (at the laboratory scale) remains Salt rejection in membrane filtration is governed by several key
challenging as it requires high-energy, sophisticated, and mega factors that influence the membrane’s ability to block salt ions
equipment. In 2010, Nair et al.[280] demonstrated superior filtra- while allowing water to pass through. One of the primary factors
tion properties of another carbon-based functionalized 2D sheet, is pore size and distribution, where membranes with smaller,
namely graphene oxide (GO) membranes that can filter ions and uniform pores, such as those in reverse osmosis and nanofiltra-
molecules. GO-based membranes were well accepted and tech- tion systems, are more effective at rejecting salts.[286] The surface
nologically implemented owing to their ease in synthesis, pro- charge of the membrane also plays a significant role as negatively
cessing, and making uniform pore sizes.[280] Moreover, the free- charged membranes repel anions like Cl−, enhancing rejection
dom of interlayer spacing is another added advantage in real-time through electrostatic interactions. The hydrated radius of ions,
applications.[281,282] However, the durability and stability of the such as Na+ and Cl−, determines their effective size in water,
membranes are still a big challenge to overcome. The only prob- and membranes must be designed to filter out these larger hy-
lem with the GO-based membrane, which limits its use in indus- drated ions.[287] Membrane thickness impacts both mechanical
tries, is thermal stability. strength and permeability, with thinner membranes often pro-

In principle, superior membranes with ultrafast permeability viding better water flow without compromising salt rejection.[288]

(economical, nontoxic, and environmentally friendly) should be Operating pressure further affects performance, where higher
at the thinnest while retaining mechanical strength, solvent re- pressures increase water permeability but may allow more salt to
sistance, maximum permeability, and energy. Over an era, it’s pass through if the membrane is not well-optimized.[289] Concen-
been realized that every membrane technology needs further im- tration polarization, where salt ions accumulate near the mem-
provement or research and development to implement it on an brane surface, can reduce rejection efficiency, requiring effec-
industrial scale. Therefore, it is time to explore something that tive flow design to mitigate this issue. In addition, there is of-
can give out-of-the-box solutions. 2D materials and their hybrids ten a trade-off between permeability and selectivity; highly selec-
membranes arrived well in time and are currently being explored tive membranes may have lower water permeability, while more
for their filtration properties with great scientific interest. Fabri- permeable membranes might sacrifice salt rejection.[290] Feed

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (14 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

Figure 10. 2D materials-based membranes employing a–d) MoS2. e) Simulation studies on membranes made up of various 2D materials.[283,284]

water composition, including the concentration and type of salts, tial applications in water purification technologies. The materi-
also influences rejection rates, with higher salt concentrations or als listed include graphene, graphene oxide, MoS2, phosphorene,
multivalent ions impacting the membrane’s performance.[291] By hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), and MXenes, each of which ex-
addressing these factors, advanced membrane materials such as hibit unique characteristics such as water permeability, mechani-
graphene oxide and MXenes can optimize both selectivity and cal strength, antifouling properties, and selectivity. These proper-
permeability for effective salt rejection in water filtration systems. ties directly influence their performance in critical applications,

With respect to the abbreviations used in Figure 11, TFN such as desalination, heavy metal removal, and the separation of
is used to define thin-film nanocomposite membranes; CNT organic contaminants.
is used for carbon nanotube membranes; SWRO, BWRO, and
HFRO represent sea-water reverse osmosis, brackish reverse os-
mosis, and high-flux water reverse osmosis, respectively; while 6. Scalable Membrane Fabrication
NF, as well as MFI, are used for nanofiltration and zeolites re-
spectively. It can be referred from Figure 11, Boretti et al.[285] In the era of water filtration technology for large-scale and indus-
that the maximum permeability for salt rejection has been trial manufacture, the preparation method of 2D materials faces
observed for graphene-based membranes as ≈10−9 m Pa− 1 s− 1. many challenges at this stage. As for the preparation method
This, however, is the starting point to realize and synthesize other above, these methods often fail to meet the requirements of in-
2D material-based membranes (graphene cousins in flatland) dustrial preparation. Therefore, it is an essential step for develop-
through the technique used to synthesize graphene, so that, it ing large scale, reliable, inexpensive printing/coating processes.
can certainly boost their performance and application in water The methods such as roll-to-roll, inkjet printing, and laser pro-
filtration. cessing have shown great feasibility in large scale fabrication

The following Table 3 provides a comparative overview of sev- methods for 2D membrane, which has great potential for water
eral 2D materials, highlighting their key properties and poten- filtration in large scale (Figure 12).

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (15 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

Figure 11. A comparison between the permeability and salt rejection of the commercially available reverse osmosis membranes and nanostructured
membranes technology for operation in high-saline and low-saline sea as well as brackish water respectively. Reproduced with permission.[285] Copyright
2018, Springer Nature.

Roll-to-roll (R2R) processing is widely used in industry and of graphene in electronics industries. This breakthrough inno-
known to be cost-effective and scalable. Roll-to-roll (R2R) man- vation was soon utilized by companies such as Samsung[45] and
ufacturing and techniques have been used for the growth and Sony[46] where a graphene sheet of 30 in. and 100 m long was fab-
transfer of graphene, two important steps in graphene manufac- ricated, respectively via roll-to-roll transfer technology. In 2015,
turing (Figure 12a). By combining CVD and R2R process, large- S. Polsen presented the design of a reactor for roll-to-roll chem-
scale production of 2D material has proved feasible and has the ical vapor deposition (CVD) on flexible substrates for applica-
potential to be an economic success in the near future.[306] The tion to continuous production of graphene on copper foil. Mean-
first report on the large-area synthesis of a uniform graphene while, the substrate translation speed varied from 25 to 500 mm
sheet on a copper foil was from Li et al.[44] in 2009, and it brought min−1, with a good uniformity and coverage of graphene.[307] R.
up the revolutionary change in realizing the potential application Esfahani discussed the scaled fabrication and characterization of

Table 3. Summary of 2D materials: properties and potential applications in water filtration.

Material Water permeability Mechanical Antifouling Selectivity Key applications Refs.
strength properties

Graphene Moderate Very high Moderate High Desalination, organic [280,292,293]
contaminants

Graphene oxide High (up to 10 L High High Tunable Desalination, heavy metals, [294–296]
m−2·h−1·bar−1) organic pollutants

MoS2 Moderate High High Moderate Heavy metals, catalytic [297,298]
degradation

Phosphorene Moderate Moderate Moderate High Heavy metals, dyes, [299]
nano-filtration

Hexagonal BN Low High High Low Oil–water separation, [300–302]
organic solvents

MXenes High High High High Heavy metals, organic [303–305]
contaminants, and

desalination

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (16 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

Figure 12. Large scale fabrication 2D material method. a) R2R method for preparing graphene membrane.[116] b) Inkjet printing as a viable method for
large-area fabrication of graphene devices.[122] c) Laser-induced porous graphene.[130]

reduced graphene oxide (rGO) nanofiltration membranes by slot inkjet printing with mobilities up to ≈95 cm2 V−1 s−1, as well as
die coating on a roll-to-roll (R2R) with integrated vacuum filtra- transparent and conductive patterns, with ≈80% transmittance
tion. These R2R-rGO membranes retained the same flux and sta- and ≈30 kΩ □−1 sheet resistance.[314] Juntunen et al. reported
bility properties as those fabricated previously using the vacuum inkjet-printed large-area few-layer graphene, and it was demon-
filtration process.[308] Lim et al. reported a facile methodology for strated that the inkjet-printed graphene had a thermoelectric per-
the large-scale production of layer-controlled MoS2 layers on an formance similar to that of state-of-the-art graphene-conductive
inexpensive substrate involving a simple coating of single source polymer nanocomposites.[315] Based on the high performance ad-
precursor with subsequent roll-to-roll-based thermal decomposi- vantages of inkjet printing graphene, Fathizadeh et al. demon-
tion developed.[309] In the same way, WS2 and the WS2/graphene strated a low-cost, simple, rapid, and scalable method for the de-
heterostructures could be fabricated on a large-area.[310] position of ultra-thin (7.5–60 nm) homogeneous graphene ox-

Inkjet printing is a useful large-area membrane manufac- ide (GO) nanofiltration membranes on polymer supports for ef-
turing method, which has the advantages of fast processing ficient water purification.[316] In the same way, a thin film com-
steps and mass production (Figure 12b).[311,312] For 2D mate- posite (TFC) NF membrane was modified by coating a binding
rial membrane, inkjet printing is a digital non-contact print- agent polydopamine (PDA) and graphene oxide (GO) using a
ing technique vastly used in both research and industry, where simple and scalable inkjet printing process showing great anti-
ink droplets are jetted and deposited in fast succession onto a fouling properties and chlorine resistance.[317] In 2020, Hu et al.
heated substrate to produce predesigned patterns without re- presented an experimental study of the drying mechanism of a
quiring a mask.[311,313] This technology is a step forward toward binary solvent ink formulation, which could naturally suppress
the development of industrial-scale, reliable, inexpensive print- the capillary flows that give rise to the coffee-ring effect, enabling
ing/coating processes. It can provide an attractive route to the them for industrial-level additive manufacturing.[318] In addition
fabrication of complex heterostructures with high resolution, to graphene, other 2-D materials can also be printed at scale
low cost, and large-scale advantages. As a result, graphene and through using inkjet printing. In 2014, Withers et al. reported
other 2D crystals are emerging as promising functional mate- that graphene, WS2, MoS2, and BN are produced by drip cast-
rials in ink formulations. For example, Li et al. introduced an ing, inkjet printing, and vacuum filtration achieving heteroge-
efficient and mature inkjet printing technique for mass pro- neous structure.[319] In 2017, McManus et al. introduced a gen-
duction of high-quality graphene with high resolution. oration. eral approach to achieve inkjet-printable, water-based, 2D crys-
In addition, the technology facilitated the fabrication of a va- tal formulations, which also provided optimal film formation
riety of graphene, which only involved printing and annealing for multi-stack fabrication. In addition, a suitable heterostruc-
process.[313] Torrisi et al. proposed the graphene demonstrated by ture fabrication due to the re-mixing of different 2D crystal led

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (17 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

to a good membrane performance.[320] Li et al. introduced a pores in μm-sized graphene membranes, and the resulting mem-
simple and efficient 2D layer material molybdenum disulfide branes can be used as molecular sieves.[341] Mechanical fields can
(MoS2) ink-jet printing technique, which benefited the massive be used to introduce pores in the same way; for example, Li et al.
and cost-effective manner, while retaining the unique properties synthesized 2D molybdenum disulfide by combining ball milling
of MoS2.[321] and ultrasonic process.[342] Lin et al. reported that the laser in-

In recent years, laser synthesis of 2D materials has also de- duced porous graphene is affected by reducing gases, and plas-
veloped into a potential large-scale preparation process, such mas during processing also have randomly distributed microp-
as laser-induced graphene, which has been widely reported ores and mesoporous pores.[322] By chemically etching the frame-
(Figure 12c). Conventional methods for preparing micro/nano work of materials through chemical etchants, the porous 2D ma-
graphene materials mainly include the assembly of graphene terials can be easily obtained. For example, multi-layered RGO
nanosheets or in situ growth by vapor-phase deposition or sput- were refluxed in HNO3 over several hours to control the pore-
tering deposition. These methods involve expensive raw ma- size through a chemical etching process.[343] In the same way,
terials or complex preparation processes that consume large few-layered GO sheets were refluxed with a hydrogen peroxide
amounts of energy and solvents, which limit the further ap- solution, and the broad pore size distribution between 2 and 70
plications of the graphene. James Tour et al. reported a facile, nm.[344] Ren et al. developed a chemical etching method to pro-
solvent-free, scalable, and economical graphene preparation pro- duce porous 2D Ti3C2Tx MXenes at room temperature in aque-
cess, which was obtained by laser inscription on commercial ous solutions. In addition, this membrane had larger specific sur-
polymers.[322] In addition to the advantages mentioned above, face areas and more open structures.[345] Pore size drives and de-
laser induced graphene(LIG)has the potential to be prepared on termines the efficiency and performance of a membrane. For an
a large scale and has already been used in a variety of scenarios ideal membrane, a 7–15 nm pore (diameter) size[79,88] is consid-
for water purification.[323–325] LIG can be applied into multiple ered to be the best for filtration. It is believed that bio-fouling
water pollution and has a place in the field of graphene mem- bacteria[346] and toxic hydrated ions present in the water[347]

brane synthesis due to its excellent expandability. In some re- can be eliminated by controlling the pore size between 7 and
search, the LIG was used to desalinate sea water, which was ben- 15 nm.
eficial to the impressive sieving performance.[324,326] Apart from
membrane filtration for sea water treatment, LIG has also been
explored for water pollutant adsorption and detection.[327,328] 8. E-Beam Fabrication of 2D Materials-Based
Besides, LIG has antimicrobial and antifouling surface effects Membrane
mainly because of its electrochemical properties and texture,
and LIG-based water filters have been used for the inactivation Only a few 2D materials derived from van der Waals layered

of bacteria.[329,330] Except from polyimide, the porous graphene bulk materials have been realized, confirming their 2D free-

obtained by treating MOF material exhibits excellent solar- standing structure is challenging. Despite this, many metals have

driven desalination and shows great sea water filtration appli- been predicted to exist as 2D systems. Ta et. al. reviewed recent

cation potential.[331] When considering large-scale production, progress in synthesizing and characterizing these 2D metals or

methods such as solution synthesis and roll-to-roll manufac- metallenes and their oxide forms using transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) and scanning TEM (STEM). (Figure 13)[348]

turing offer scalability advantages over more complex meth-
ods such asCVD, which are limited by production speed and Two primary approaches for forming freestanding monoatomic

cost. metallic membranes were identified: suspending the metallene
or metallene oxide in graphene pores and electron-beam sput-
tering for selective etching of metal alloys. The data show a

7. Fabrication of Nanopores in 2D Materials growing number of confirmed 2D metals/metallenes and 2D

For 2D materials, the micro–mesoporous surface has great influ- metal/metallene oxides, indicating a bright future for further

ence on water filtration performance. At present, the methods for discoveries. 2D materials such as MoS2, WS2, and coated on

the fabrication of 2D porous materials are versatile, mainly chem- copper substrate can thus be e-beam irradiated, and chalco-

ical etching, physical field etching, and phase transition methods. gen atoms can selectively be evaporated, leaving the traces of

Meanwhile, the porous 2D materials can also be obtained from transition metals (Mo/W etc). Inter-atomic distances in these

self-assembly reactions between atoms or molecules, mainly metallenes are ≈3.5 Å, which is way larger than the diam-

including template free methods and template-assisted meth- eter of water molecules. Thus, this technique can be imple-

ods. Ultraviolet-induced oxidative etching,[230] chemical/plasma mented for efficient water filtration, filtering out all undesirable

etching,[332–335] and ion irradiation[336–338] are the techniques be- ions.

ing pursued to introduce nanopores in graphene and other
2D materials. Several research efforts to synthesize porous 9. Design of Ångström-Scale Capillaries
graphene through physical field etching method (using photo,
electron beam, and oxygen plasma-etching methods) have been Ångström-scale capillaries, created using 2D materials, represent
reported.[339] For example, Bai et al. used the poly(styrene-block- a cutting-edge technique in water filtration technology. These
methyl methacrylate) (P(S-b-MMA)) block copolymer thin film capillaries, with dimensions comparable to typical ions, lever-
as the etching template, followed by employing oxygen plasma age the unique properties of 2D materials to achieve high se-
etch to punch holes into the graphene layer.[340] P. Koenig et al. lectivity and efficiency in separating ions and molecules. Un-
introduced that ultraviolet-induced oxidative etching can create like traditional nanoporous membranes that rely primarily on

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (18 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

Figure 13. E-beam thinning of 2D materials. E-beam-driven-formation of 2D Au membrane through thinning of Au–Ag alloy. a) Schematic of fabrication
of monolayer Au membrane by in situ dealloying of Au–Ag alloy. Au and Ag atoms are shown as yellow and blue spheres, respectively. b) HRSTEM image
of monolayer Au membrane framed in bulk Au–Ag along ⟨001⟩ zone axis. c,d) Depiction of structural changes in Mo nanoribbons upon electron beam
irradiation until the formation of a single atom Mo chain. e-beam fabrication of monolayer Mo membranes. e) Schematic illustration of fabrication of
monolayer Mo membrane from freestanding monolayer MoSe2 film. f) STEM-ADF image of Mo membrane embedded in monolayer MoSe2 film. Mo
membrane regions are highlighted in false green.[348]

the size and charge of hydrated ions, ångström-scale capillaries such as Na+ and Cl−, while allowing water to permeate with
offer a new mechanism for ion selectivity. Recent studies have little resistance. This remarkable selectivity is akin to biologi-
demonstrated that ångström-scale channels, assembled via van cal channels such as aquaporins and is achieved by fabricating
der Waals forces, can distinguish between ions with the same capillaries through the removal of a single atomic plane from
charge and similar hydrated diameters. This selectivity is at- bulk crystals.[350] Notably, these channels permit the transport
tributed to the positions that ions occupy within the layered struc- of protons (H+), highlighting their potential in applications re-
ture of nanoconfined water, which depend on the ion-core size. quiring selective ion transport such as proton-conducting mem-
Such a mechanism allows for selective ion separation beyond branes. Another intriguing aspect of water confined in ångström-
simple steric sieving, providing a pathway to more sophisticated scale capillaries is its anomalously low dielectric constant. Ex-
filtration systems (Figure 14).[349] perimental evidence indicates that water molecules in these

In addition, these capillaries have shown the capability of confined spaces exhibit significantly restricted rotational free-
complete steric exclusion of even the smallest hydrated ions dom, resulting in a dielectric constant as low as ≈2 compared

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (19 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

Figure 14. a) Cartoons of ions with similar hydrated diameters (DH) but different ionic diameters (DI) relative to the 6.8 Å channel height. Right:
schematic of Å-channel device and setup. Inset: cross-sectional view of the three-layer Å channel. b) I–V characteristics for various salts (color coded)
measured for a hBN-channel device (w ≈ 120 nm, h ≈ 6.8 Å, N ≈ 400, L ≈ 6 μm, and C = 0.1 m). Inset: resistance per channel versus L for six devices.
c) I–V curves for 0.01 and 0.10 m salt solutions. Top inset: schematic of drift–diffusion experiment. Bottom inset: Em measured for the salts.[349]

to ≈80 in bulk water. This electrically “dead” layer of water, a 10. Sunlight-Powered 2D Materials-Based Water
few molecules thick, provides crucial insights into the behav- Purifier
ior of interfacial water and has implications for theories on
water-mediated surface interactions and the design of other flu- Natural vascular plants utilize osmotic pressure, transpiration,
idic systems under extreme confinement.[351] Moreover, stud- and guttation to produce clean water using sunlight. Inspired by
ies on ion transport through these ultra-narrow slits reveal this natural process, a sunlight-driven purifier for efficient water
that ions with hydrated diameters larger than the slit size purification is reported. This device features a negative temper-
can still pass through, albeit with reduced mobility. This phe- ature response poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) hydrogel (PN) an-
nomenon underscores the role of hydration shell deformation chored onto a superhydrophilic melamine foam skeleton, with
and ion-surface interactions in confined spaces. Interestingly, an a PNIPAm-modified graphene (PG) filter membrane. Molecular
asymmetry has been observed between anions and cations of dynamics simulations and experiments demonstrate that the su-
the same diameter, which is essential for the development of perhydrophilic melamine skeleton accelerates the swelling and
advanced nanofluidic devices and precise molecular separation deswelling rate of the PNPG-F purifier. Under one sun, Geng et.
technologies.[352] al. demonstrated that this structure collected 4.2 kg m−2 h−1 and

In summary, the development of ångström-scale capillaries us- achieved >99% ionic rejection from brine, offering great poten-
ing 2D materials has significantly advanced the field of water fil- tial for diverse water treatments (Figure 15).[354]

tration by providing a platform for highly selective and efficient
ion separation. These findings pave the way for innovative appli- 11. Conclusion
cations in various domains, including energy storage, nanoflu-
idics, and beyond. As research progresses, the understanding The progress in the development of 2D nanoporous mem-
of transport mechanisms at the atomic scale will further en- branes, particularly those based on graphene and its deriva-
hance the design and functionality of these advanced filtration tives, has shown tremendous potential for water filtration
systems. applications. These membranes leverage the exceptional

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (20 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

Figure 15. Schematic of water treatment of the sunlight-powered purifier (PNPG-F). a) Microstructure of the sunlight-driven purifier. The PNPG-F
purifier consists of PNIPAm chains growing on the surface of melamine skeleton and PG membrane coated outside. Melamine provides a water suction
channel via capillary force and inhibits bulk volume collapse of the purifier. b) Water purification procedure based on the PNPG-F purifier. The coated
PG demonstrates solar–thermal conversion and pollute rejection. After being immersed in pollute water, PNPG-F adsorbs a large amount of clean
water. Under sunlight irradiation, the PG membrane converts sunlight into thermal energy and heats PN to the temperature above LCST, facilitating
hydrophilization; thus, clean water can be produced via transpiration and guttation.[353]

properties of 2D materials, including mechanical strength, during fluid flow, and ensuring long-term performance un-
chemical robustness (absence of dangling bonds), low surface der real-world filtration conditions. In addition, addressing
energy, and antifouling characteristics, making them ideal the toxicity and environmental impact of these materials re-
candidates for filtering contaminants from water. Frontline mains an important consideration. Efforts to improve pack-
materials, such as boron nitride-graphene heterostructures, aging, reduce synthesis costs, and extend the operational
various TMDCs, phosphorene, borophene, and MXenes, have lifespan of these membranes continue to be areas of active
demonstrated promise due to their unique structural and surface research.
properties. Despite these promising properties, challenges in Notably, sunlight-powered 2D materials-based water purifiers
scaling up production, achieving precise pore size control, and have emerged as a sustainable solution, harnessing solar energy
maintaining membrane longevity still hinder their widespread for high-efficiency water purification. These systems are espe-
industrial use. Graphene, in particular, has garnered significant cially suited for off-grid or remote applications where traditional
attention, but its monolayer hexagonal structure is not natu- energy sources may not be available. This innovative approach
rally effective at blocking all pathogens or soluble ions due to reduces energy consumption and environmental impact, mak-
the interatomic distances between carbon atoms. To address ing it a promising alternative for clean energy-driven filtration
this, introducing defects in the graphene structure has been technologies.
explored as a means to enhance filtration capabilities without In summary, while considerable progress has been made in
sacrificing water flow efficiency. Heterostructured materials the field of 2D nanoporous membranes, several technical, eco-
have been particularly promising in increasing the strength and nomic, and environmental hurdles remain before they can be
durability of membranes, overcoming some of the limitations of widely adopted for industrial applications. The field is still in
monolayer graphene membranes. In addition, inducing strain its early stages, with ongoing research necessary to refine fab-
in graphene to adjust interatomic distances is an area of ongo- rication techniques, improve membrane properties, and enable
ing theoretical research, though practical applications remain large-scale production. Continued efforts in defect engineering,
limited. scalability, and material optimization are critical to realizing the

Key challenges (Figure 16) include managing defects dur- full potential of these advanced membranes for global water pu-
ing membrane synthesis, maintaining membrane stability rification challenges.

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (21 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

Figure 16. Challenges faced by 2D material nanoporous membrane during water filtration.

12. Perspective systems can purify water without the need for external power
sources, making them particularly useful in remote or off-grid

Looking ahead, the future of 2D materials in water filtration is areas. This approach not only reduces energy consumption but
promising, with several cutting-edge techniques and innovations also contributes to environmental sustainability by providing
expected to drive the field forward. Among these, the integra- a clean energy source for filtration processes. The application
tion of lasers for precise material manipulation and the use of of such systems is still in the early stages but holds immense
nanoparticles during chemical vapor deposition (CVD) growth potential for future deployment in various settings.
are two areas of high potential. Nanoparticles such as aluminum While significant progress has been made, several techni-
oxide, silicon, and titanium oxide can inhibit carbon growth cal challenges remain to be addressed. These include control-
on copper substrates, allowing for selective etching. This tech- ling pore size and distribution, managing defects during mem-
nique is still being developed, but it shows great promise for en- brane fabrication, improving support membranes, and optimiz-
abling the precise assembly of nanopores in 2D materials, poten- ing real-time filtration performance. The scalability of these ma-
tially overcoming some of the limitations of current approaches terials and the development of cost-effective production meth-
such as ion bombardment, plasma etching, and chemical ods are critical for their widespread adoption. Further, address-
etching. ing the cytotoxicity and environmental impact of these materi-

Another key advancement lies in the design of ångström-scale als will be important to ensure that they are safe for large-scale
capillaries, which represent a significant leap forward in filtra- use. Research into the synthesis of new multifunctional 2D/0D
tion technology. These capillaries, with their precisely controlled and 2D/1D hybrid nanocomposites is another promising avenue.
dimensions, are capable of filtering out contaminants at the These nanocomposites, which incorporate various 2D materi-
molecular level while maintaining efficient water flow. This als such as borophene, phosphorene, and their heterostructures,
level of precision, combined with the antifouling properties and have the potential to outperform conventional membranes in
chemical robustness of 2D materials, makes them highly attrac- terms of filtration efficiency, durability, and scalability. Their de-
tive for next-generation filtration systems.Sunlight-powered 2D velopment could lead to novel thin-film nanocomposite mem-
materials-based water purifiers also present a highly innovative branes that significantly enhance performance while reducing
and sustainable solution. By harnessing solar energy, these synthesis costs.

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (22 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

Ultimately, the future of water filtration technology will [7] S. X. Wang, Z. H. Wang, X. T. Cheng, J. Li, Z. P. Sang, X. D. Zhang, L.
likely be shaped by these emerging techniques and materials. L. Han, X. Y. Qiao, Z. M. Wu, Z. Q. Wang, Environ. Health Perspect.
Ångström-scale capillaries, laser-based nanopore assembly, and 2007, 115, 643.
sunlight-powered purification systems offer exciting opportuni- [8] M. S. Kurdi, Indian J. Anaesth. 2016, 60, 157.

ties for advancing membrane performance and addressing global [9] P. M. Mayer, K. D. Moran, E. L. Miller, S. M. Brander, S. Harper, M.

water contamination challenges. Continued research and devel- Garcia-Jaramillo, V. Carrasco-Navarro, K. T. Ho, R. M. Burgess, L.
M. Thornton Hampton, E. F. Granek, M. McCauley, J. K. McIntyre,

opment will be essential to optimize these technologies and real- E. P. Kolodziej, X. Hu, A. J. Williams, B. A. Beckingham, M. E.
ize their full potential in providing sustainable and effective water Jackson, R. D. Sanders-Smith, C. L. Fender, G. A. King, M. Bollman,
purification solutions. These advancements could revolutionize S. S. Kaushal, B. E. Cunningham, S. J. Hutton, J. Lang, H. V. Goss,
the field, offering cleaner, more efficient, and environmentally S. Siddiqui, R. Sutton, D. Lin, et al., Sci. Total Environ. 2024, 927,
friendly filtration options for both industrial and commercial ap- 171153.
plications. [10] Z. Yuan, R. Nag, E. Cummins, Sci. Total Environ. 2022, 823, 153730.

[11] A. Prüss-Ustün, J. Bartram, T. Clasen, J. M. Colford Jr, O. Cumming,
V. Curtis, S. Bonjour, A. D. Dangour, J. De France, L. Fewtrell, M.

Acknowledgements C. Freeman, B. Gordon, P. R. Hunter, R. B. Johnston, C. Mathers, D.
Mäusezahl, K. Medlicott, M. Neira, M. Stocks, J. Wolf, S. Cairncross,

P.R. would like to thank SERB for SRG (Grant no. SRG/2022/000192) and Trop. Med. Int. Health 2014, 19, 894.
SEED grant no I/SEED/PRJ/20220044. P.R. and E.H.S.S. would like to [12] K. Levy, Am. J. Trop. Med. Hygiene 2015, 93, 899.
acknowledge the support from the United Arab Emirates University–Asian [13] M. Sinclair, J. O’Toole, K. Gibney, K. Leder, J. Water Health 2014, 13,
University Alliance (UAEU–AUA) joint research project and the National 413.
Water Center Grant number 31R196. [14] A. Ahmad, T. Azam, in Bottled and Packaged Water (Eds: A. M.

Open access publishing facilitated by The University of Newcastle, as Grumezescu, A. M. Holban), Woodhead Publishing, Sawston, UK
part of the Wiley - The University of Newcastle agreement via the Council 2019, pp. 83–120.
of Australian University Librarians.

[15] G. Rosa, L. Miller, T. Clasen, Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 2010, 82, 473.
[16] P. Pal, in Industrial Water Treatment Process Technology (Ed: P. Pal),

Conflict of Interest Elsevier, Oxford, UK 2017, pp. 21–63.
[17] C. Desai, Indian J Pharmacol. 2016, 48, 224.

The authors declare no conflict of interest. [18] Á. García-Gil, R. A. García-Muñoz, K. G. McGuigan, J. Marugán,
Molecules 2021, 26, 3431.

[19] E. S. Soliman, R. A Hassan, D. S Farid, Open Vet J. 2021, 11, 483.

Author Contributions [20] H. Backer, in Travel Medicine, 2nd ed. (Eds: J. S. Keystone, P. E.
Kozarsky, D. O. Freedman, H. D Nothdurft, B. A. Connor), Mosby,

P.R. and Z.L. contributed equally to this work. P.R. and Z.L. primarily wrote Edinburgh, UK 2008, pp. 47–58.
the manuscript. The outline was finalized in consultation with E.H.S.S. and [21] A. A. Adegbola, T. A. Ekundayo, Int. J. Eng. Sci. Technol. 2012, 4, 3881.
P.K. A.A., S.A., and M.A.S. contributed to collecting data for making ana- [22] Z. Yang, Y. Zhou, Z. Feng, X. Rui, T. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Polymers 2019,
lytic and informative graphs, as well as figures and have equal second au- 11, 1252.
thor contributions. Consultations with S.P. were made during manuscript [23] A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater. 2007, 6, 183.
preparation. P.R., A.V., and P.K. revised it. All authors have given approval [24] C. Neto, A. H., F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov, A. K.
for the final version of the manuscript. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys. 2009, 81, 109.

[25] Y. Saito, T. Nojima, Y. Iwasa, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2016, 2, 16094.
[26] A. T. S. Wee, M. C. Hersam, M. Chhowalla, Y. Gogotsi, ACS Nano

Keywords 2016, 10, 8121.
[27] B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya, Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2017, 2,

2D materials, flatland, nanoporous, pore size, water filtration 16098.
[28] Y. Gogotsi, B. Anasori, ACS Nano 2019, 13, 8491.

Received: August 16, 2024 [29] S. Bellani, A. Bartolotta, A. Agresti, G. Calogero, G. Grancini, A.
Revised: September 22, 2024 Di Carlo, E. Kymakis, F. Bonaccorso, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2021, 50,

Published online: October 10, 2024 11870.
[30] M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L.

Hultman, Y. Gogotsi, M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater. 2011, 23, 4248.
[31] D. Geng, H. Y. Yang, Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1800865.

[1] A. Mukherjee, in Groundwater of South Asia (Ed: A. Mukherjee), [32] A. J. Mannix, B. Kiraly, M. C. Hersam, N. P. Guisinger, Nat. Rev.
Springer Singapore, Singapore 2018, pp. 3–20. Chem. 2017, 1, 0014.

[2] W. Arvelo, A. Pavia, C. Braden, in Principles and Practice of Pediatric [33] C. Huang, S. Wu, A. M. Sanchez, J. J. P. Peters, R. Beanland, J. S.
Infectious Disease, 3rd ed. (Eds: S. S. Long, W. B. Saunders), Edin- Ross, P. Rivera, W. Yao, D. H. Cobden, X. Xu, Nat. Mater. 2014, 13,
burgh, UK 2008, pp. 397–406. 1096.

[3] M. Fazal-ur-Rehman, J. Med. Chem. Sci. 2019, 2, 21. [34] A. S. Mayorov, R. V. Gorbachev, S. V. Morozov, L. Britnell, R. Jalil,
[4] P. K. Pandey, P. H. Kass, M. L. Soupir, S. Biswas, V. P. Singh, AMB L. A. Ponomarenko, P. Blake, K. S. Novoselov, K. Watanabe, T.

Express 2014, 4, 51. Taniguchi, A. K. Geim, Nano Lett. 2011, 11, 2396.
[5] C. Mora, T. McKenzie, I. M. Gaw, J. M. Dean, H. von Hammerstein, [35] Y. Cao, A. Mishchenko, G. L. Yu, E. Khestanova, A. P. Rooney,

T. A. Knudson, R. O. Setter, C. Z. Smith, K. M. Webster, J. A. Patz, E. E. Prestat, A. V. Kretinin, P. Blake, M. B. Shalom, C. Woods, J.
C. Franklin, Nat. Clim. Change 2022, 12, 869. Chapman, G. Balakrishnan, I. V. Grigorieva, K. S. Novoselov, B. A.

[6] P. V. Hodson, J. Adams, R. S. Brown, Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 2019, Piot, M. Potemski, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. J. Haigh, A. K. Geim,
38, 302. R. V. Gorbachev, Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 4914.

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (23 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

[36] A. Khan, S. M. Islam, S. Ahmed, R. R. Kumar, M. R. Habib, K. Huang, [66] T. Uwanno, Y. Hattori, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, K. Nagashio, 2D
M. Hu, X. Yu, D. Yang, Adv. Sci. 2018, 5, 1800050. Mater. 2015, 2, 041002.

[37] A. Khan, J. Cong, R. R. Kumar, S. Ahmed, D. Yang, X. Yu, ACS Appl. [67] S. M. Shinde, T. Das, A. T. Hoang, B. K. Sharma, X. Chen, J. H. Ahn,
Nano Mater. 2022, 5, 17544. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2018, 28, 1706231.

[38] Y. Zhang, Y. Yao, M. G. Sendeku, L. Yin, X. Zhan, F. Wang, Z. Wang, [68] Y. C. Lin, W. Zhang, J. K. Huang, K. K. Liu, Y. H. Lee, C. T. Liang, C.
J. He, Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1901694. W. Chu, L. J. Li, Nanoscale 2012, 4, 6637.

[39] S. Bertolazzi, P. Bondavalli, S. Roche, T. San, S. Y. Choi, L. Colombo, [69] X. Liang, B. A. Sperling, I. Calizo, G. Cheng, C. A. Hacker, Q. Zhang,
F. Bonaccorso, P. Samorì, Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1806663. Y. Obeng, K. Yan, H. Peng, Q. Li, X. Zhu, H. Yuan, A. R. Hight Walker,

[40] X. Liu, M. C. Hersam, Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1801586. Z. Liu, L.-m. Peng, C. A. Richter, ACS Nano 2011, 5, 9144.
[41] T. A. Shifa, F. Wang, Y. Liu, J. He, Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1804828. [70] P. Waduge, I. Bilgin, J. Larkin, R. Y. Henley, K. Goodfellow, A. C.
[42] J. Dong, L. Zhang, F. Ding, Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1801583. Graham, D. C. Bell, N. Vamivakas, S. Kar, M. Wanunu, ACS Nano
[43] X. Xu, T. Guo, H. Kim, M. K. Hota, R. S. Alsaadi, M. Lanza, X. Zhang, 2015, 9, 7352.

H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Mater. 2022, 34, 2108258. [71] V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano, J. N.
[44] X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, Coleman, Science 2013, 340, 1226419.

I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo, R. S. Ruoff, Science [72] K. Xiao, D. B. Geohegan, Trends Chem. 2022, 4, 769.
2009, 324, 1312. [73] Z. Li, L. Zhai, Y. Ge, Z. Huang, Z. Shi, J. Liu, W. Zhai, J. Liang, H.

[45] S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J. S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Zhang, Natl. Sci. Rev. 2021, 9, nwab142.
Lei, H. Ri Kim, Y. I. Song, Y. J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Özyilmaz, J. H. Ahn, [74] Y. Huang, Y. H. Pan, R. Yang, L. H. Bao, L. Meng, H. L. Luo, Y. Q.
B. H. Hong, S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2010, 5, 574. Cai, G. D. Liu, W. J. Zhao, Z. Zhou, L. M. Wu, Z. L. Zhu, M. Huang,

[46] T. Kobayashi, M. Bando, N. Kimura, K. Shimizu, K. Kadono, N. L. W. Liu, L. Liu, P. Cheng, K. H. Wu, S. B. Tian, C. Z. Gu, Y. G. Shi,
Umezu, K. Miyahara, S. Hayazaki, S. Nagai, Y. Mizuguchi, Y. Y. F. Guo, Z. G. Cheng, J. P. Hu, L. Zhao, G. H. Yang, E. Sutter, P.
Murakami, D. Hobara, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2013, 102, 023112. Sutter, Y. L. Wang, W. Ji, X. J. Zhou, et al., Nat. Commun. 2020, 11,

[47] M. Imran, S. Ahmed, A. Z. Abdullah, J. Hakami, A. A. Chaudhary, 2453.
H. A. Rudayni, S. U. D. Khan, A. Khan, N. S. Basher, Luminescence [75] M. Zhao, C. Casiraghi, K. Parvez, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2024, 53, 3036.
2023, 38, 1064. [76] R. Quirós-Ovies, M. Laborda, N. M. Sabanés, L. Martín-Pérez, S.

[48] T. Kim, J. Mun, H. Park, D. Joung, M. Diware, C. Won, J. Park, S. H. M.-D. Silva, E. Burzurí, V. Sebastian, E. M. Pérez, J. Santamaría, ACS
Jeong, S. W. Kang, Nanotechnology 2017, 28, 18LT01. Nano 2023, 17, 5984.

[49] P. Yang, X. Zou, Z. Zhang, M. Hong, J. Shi, S. Chen, J. Shu, L. Zhao, [77] M. A. Shannon, P. W. Bohn, M. Elimelech, J. G. Georgiadis, B. J.
S. Jiang, X. Zhou, Y. Huan, C. Xie, P. Gao, Q. Chen, Q. Zhang, Z. Liu, Mariñas, A. M. Mayes, Nature 2008, 452, 301.
Y. Zhang, Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 979. [78] A. Bianco, M. Prato, 2D Mater. 2015, 2, 030201.

[50] S. Boandoh, S. H. Choi, J. H. Park, S. Y. Park, S. Bang, M. S. Jeong, [79] J. Feng, M. Graf, K. Liu, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Dumcenco, M.
J. S. Lee, H. J. Kim, W. Yang, J. Y. Choi, S. M. Kim, K. K. Kim, Small Heiranian, V. Nandigana, N. R. Aluru, A. Kis, A. Radenovic, Nature
2017, 13, 1701306. 2016, 536, 197.

[51] H. Yu, M. Liao, W. Zhao, G. Liu, X. J. Zhou, Z. Wei, X. Xu, K. Liu, Z. [80] A. J. Storm, J. H. Chen, X. S. Ling, H. W. Zandbergen, C. Dekker, Nat.
Hu, K. Deng, S. Zhou, J. A. Shi, L. Gu, C. Shen, T. Zhang, L. Du, L. Mater. 2003, 2, 537.
Xie, J. Zhu, W. Chen, R. Yang, D. Shi, G. Zhang, ACS Nano 2017, 11, [81] M. J. Kim, M. Wanunu, D. C. Bell, A. Meller, Adv. Mater. 2006, 18,
12001. 3149.

[52] A. Gupta, T. Sakthivel, S. Seal, Prog. Mater. Sci. 2015, 73, 44. [82] P. S. Spinney, D. G. Howitt, R. L. Smith, S. D. Collins, Nanotechnol-
[53] K. Kang, S. Xie, L. Huang, Y. Han, P. Y. Huang, K. F. Mak, C. J. Kim, ogy 2010, 21, 375301.

D. Muller, J. Park, Nature 2015, 520, 656. [83] Y. Deng, Q. Huang, Y. Zhao, D. Zhou, C. Ying, D. Wang, Nanotech-
[54] J. Cai, X. Han, X. Wang, X. Meng, Matter 2020, 2, 587. nology 2017, 28, 045302.
[55] Y. Liang, Y. Chen, Y. Sun, S. Xu, J. Wu, C. Tan, X. Xu, H. Yuan, L. Yang, [84] J. Gierak, A. Madouri, A. L. Biance, E. Bourhis, G. Patriarche, C.

Y. Chen, P. Gao, J. Guo, H. Peng, Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1901964. Ulysse, D. Lucot, X. Lafosse, L. Auvray, L. Bruchhaus, R. Jede, Mi-
[56] A. J. Mannix, Z. Zhang, N. P. Guisinger, B. I. Yakobson, M. C. croelectron. Eng. 2007, 84, 779.

Hersam, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2018, 13, 444. [85] V. Mussi, P. Fanzio, L. Repetto, G. Firpo, P. Scaruffi, S. Stigliani, G.
[57] B. Feng, J. Zhang, Q. Zhong, W. Li, S. Li, H. Li, P. Cheng, S. Meng, P. Tonini, U. Valbusa, Nanotechnology 2010, 21, 145102.

L. Chen, K. Wu, Nat. Chem. 2016, 8, 563. [86] J. Li, D. Stein, C. McMullan, D. Branton, M. J. Aziz, J. A.
[58] L. Tang, J. Tan, H. Nong, B. Liu, H. M. Cheng, Acc Mater Res 2021, Golovchenko, Nature 2001, 412, 166.

2, 36. [87] J. P. Thiruraman, K. Fujisawa, G. Danda, P. M. Das, T. Zhang, A.
[59] W. S. Hummers Jr., R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1958, 80, 1339. Bolotsky, N. Perea-López, A. Nicolaï, P. Senet, M. Terrones, M.
[60] N. I. Kovtyukhova, P. J. Ollivier, B. R. Martin, T. E. Mallouk, S. A. Drndíc, Nano Lett. 2018, 18, 1651.

Chizhik, E. V. Buzaneva, A. D. Gorchinskiy, Chem. Mater. 1999, 11, [88] M. Graf, Lihter, M. Thakur, V. Georgiou, J. Topolancik, B. R. Ilic, K.
771. Liu, J. Feng, Y. Astier, A. Radenovic, Nat. Protoc. 2019, 14, 1130.

[61] M. Hirata, T. Gotou, S. Horiuchi, M. Fujiwara, M. Ohba, Carbon [89] M. D. Fischbein, M. Drndíc, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2008, 93, 113107.
2004, 42, 2929. [90] A. Garcia, A. M. Raya, M. M. Mariscal, R. Esparza, M. Herrera, S.

[62] D. C. Marcano, D. V. Kosynkin, J. M. Berlin, A. Sinitskii, Z. Sun, A. I. Molina, G. Scavello, P. L. Galindo, M. Jose-Yacaman, A. Ponce,
Slesarev, L. B. Alemany, W. Lu, J. M. Tour, ACS Nano 2010, 4, 4806. Ultramicroscopy 2014, 146, 33.

[63] J. Zhou, J. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Zhou, Y. Chen, J. Xia, H. Wang, Y. Xie, H. [91] R. Zan, Q. M. Ramasse, R. Jalil, T. Georgiou, U. Bangert, K. S.
Yu, J. Lei, D. Wu, F. Liu, Q. Fu, Q. Zeng, C. H. Hsu, C. Yang, L. Lu, Novoselov, ACS Nano 2013, 7, 10167.
T. Yu, Z. Shen, H. Lin, B. I. Yakobson, Q. Liu, K. Suenaga, G. Liu, Z. [92] A. Barreiro, F. Börrnert, S. M. Avdoshenko, B. Rellinghaus, G.
Liu, Nature 2018, 556, 355. Cuniberti, M. H. Rümmeli, L. M. K. Vandersypen, Sci. Rep. 2013,

[64] K. Kang, K. H. Lee, Y. Han, H. Gao, S. Xie, D. A. Muller, J. Park, 3, 1115.
Nature 2017, 550, 229. [93] T. Xu, K. Yin, X. Xie, L. He, B. Wang, L. Sun, Small 2012, 8, 3422.

[65] A. Gurarslan, Y. Yu, L. Su, Y. Yu, F. Suarez, S. Yao, Y. Zhu, M. Ozturk, [94] K. Yin, S. Huang, X. Chen, X. Wang, J. Kong, Y. Chen, J. Xue, ACS
Y. Zhang, L. Cao, ACS Nano 2014, 8, 11522. Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 10, 28909.

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (24 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

[95] C. J. Russo, J. A. Golovchenko, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2012, [131] R. Devanathan, Energy Environ. Sci. 2008, 1, 101.
109, 5953. [132] G. Merle, M. Wessling, K. Nijmeijer, J. Membr. Sci. 2011, 377, 1.

[96] T. Hayashi, K. Arima, N. Yamashita, S. Park, Z. Ma, O. Tabata, K. [133] J. S. Jang, Y. Lim, H. Shin, J. Kim, T. G. Yun, Adv. Mater. 2023, 35,
Kawai, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol. 2018, 17, 727. 2209076.

[97] D. V. Verschueren, W. Yang, C. Dekker, Nanotechnology 2018, 29, [134] G. Madhaiyan, A. T. Sun, H. W. Zan, H. F. Meng, S. F. Horng, L. Y.
145302. Chen, H. W. Hung, Sensors 2021, 21, 5783.

[98] H. Kwok, K. Briggs, V. Tabard-Cossa, PLoS One 2014, 9, e92880. [135] G. M. Geise, H. S. Lee, D. J. Miller, B. D. Freeman, J. E. McGrath, D.
[99] J. Feng, K. Liu, M. Graf, M. Lihter, R. D. Bulushev, D. Dumcenco, R. Paul, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys. 2010, 48, 1685.

D. T. L. Alexander, D. Krasnozhon, T. Vuletic, A. Kis, A. Radenovic, [136] A. W. Mohammad, C. Y. Ng, Y. P. Lim, G. H. Ng, Food Bioprocess
Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 3431. Technol. 2012, 5, 1143.

[100] A. King, G. Johnson, D. Engelberg, W. Ludwig, J. Marrow, Science [137] R. van Reis, A. Zydney, J. Membr. Sci. 2007, 297, 16.
2008, 321, 382. [138] L. F. Greenlee, D. F. Lawler, B. D. Freeman, B. Marrot, P. Moulin,

[101] A. Zandiatashbar, G. H. Lee, S. J. An, S. Lee, N. Mathew, M. Water Res. 2009, 43, 2317.
Terrones, T. Hayashi, C. R. Picu, J. Hone, N. Koratkar, Nat. Commun. [139] M. Heiranian, A. B. Farimani, N. R. Aluru, Nat. Commun. 2015, 6,
2014, 5, 3186. 8616.

[102] Y. Liu, X. Chen, J. Appl. Phys. 2014, 115, 034303. [140] S. Bolisetty, R. Mezzenga, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2016, 11, 365.
[103] D. Cohen-Tanugi, J. C. Grossman, Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 6171. [141] D.-e. Jiang, V. R. Cooper, S. Dai, Nano Lett. 2009, 9, 4019.
[104] X. Wang, N. D. Mansukhani, L. M. Guiney, Z. Ji, C. H. Chang, M. [142] D. F. Stamatialis, B. J. Papenburg, M. Gironés, S. Saiful, S. N. M.

Wang, Y. P. Liao, T. B. Song, B. Sun, R. Li, T. Xia, M. C. Hersam, A. Bettahalli, S. Schmitmeier, M. Wessling, J. Membr. Sci. 2008, 308,
E. Nel, Small 2015, 11, 5079. 1.

[105] W. Z. Teo, E. L. K. Chng, Z. Sofer, M. Pumera, Chemistry 2014, 20, [143] M. Takht Ravanchi, T. Kaghazchi, A. Kargari, Desalination 2009, 235,
9627. 199.

[106] E. L. K. Chng, Z. Sofer, M. Pumera, Nanoscale 2014, 6, 14412. [144] M. M. Pendergast, E. M. V. Hoek, Energy Environ. Sci. 2011, 4, 1946.
[107] P. Shah, T. N. Narayanan, C. Z. Li, S. Alwarappan, Nanotechnology [145] S. Neelakandan, L. Wang, B. Zhang, J. Ni, M. Hu, C. Gao, W. Y. Wong,

2015, 26, 315102. L. Wang, Polym. Rev. 2022, 62, 261.
[108] J. H. Appel, D. O. Li, J. D. Podlevsky, A. Debnath, A. A. Green, Q. H. [146] G. Goel, C. Hélix-Nielsen, H. M. Upadhyaya, S. Goel, npj Clean Water

Wang, J. Chae, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 2016, 2, 361. 2021, 4, 41.
[109] D. McManus, S. Vranic, F. Withers, V. Sanchez-Romaguera, M. [147] T. Xiao, Z. Zhu, L. Li, J. Shi, Z. Li, X. Zuo, Sep. Purif. Technol. 2023,

Macucci, H. Yang, R. Sorrentino, K. Parvez, S. K. Son, G. Iannaccone, 318, 123977.
K. Kostarelos, G. Fiori, C. Casiraghi, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2017, 12, 343. [148] K. Xiao, J. Sun, Y. Mo, Z. Fang, P. Liang, X. Huang, J. Ma, B. Ma,

[110] J. Hao, G. Song, T. Liu, X. Yi, K. Yang, L. Cheng, Z. Liu, Adv. Sci. 2017, Desalination 2014, 343, 217.
4, 1600160. [149] M. Yang, S. Lotfikatouli, Y. Chen, T. Li, H. Ma, X. Mao, B. S. Hsiao,

[111] X. Qian, S. Shen, T. Liu, L. Cheng, Z. Liu, Nanoscale 2015, 7, 6380. J. Membr. Sci. 2022, 650, 120422.
[112] N. M. Latiff, W. Z. Teo, Z. Sofer, A. C. Fisher, M. Pumera, Chemistry [150] M. Sivakumar, D. R. Mohan, R. Rangarajan, J. Membr. Sci. 2006, 268,

2015, 21, 13991. 208.
[113] H. Fu, Z. Li, H. Xie, Z. Sun, B. Wang, H. Huang, G. Han, H. Wang, [151] A.-l. Ling, Q. Chen, Desalination 1995, 101, 51.

P. K. Chu, X. F. Yu, RSC Adv. 2017, 7, 14618. [152] N. Maroufi, N. Hajilary, Sustain. Water Resour. Manage. 2023, 9,
[114] M. Pelin, L. Fusco, V. León, C. Martín, A. Criado, S. Sosa, E. Vázquez, 142.

A. Tubaro, M. Prato, Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 40572. [153] D. Cohen-Tanugi, J. C. Grossman, Nano Lett. 2012, 12, 3602.
[115] A. C. C. Rotzetter, C. R. Kellenberger, C. M. Schumacher, C. Mora, [154] X. Chen, W. Wang, L. Zhu, C. Liu, F. Cui, N. Li, B. Zhang, ACS Appl.

R. N. Grass, M. Loepfe, N. A. Luechinger, W. J. Stark, Adv. Mater. Nano Mater. 2021, 4, 673.
2013, 25, 6057. [155] Y. Li, S. Yang, K. Zhang, B. Van der Bruggen, Desalination 2019, 454,

[116] L. Prozorovska, P. R. Kidambi, Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1801179. 48.
[117] L. Wang, M. S. H. Boutilier, P. R. Kidambi, D. Jang, N. G. [156] Y. Peng, J. Yang, H. Qi, H. Li, S. Li, B. Su, L. Han, Sep. Purif. Technol.

Hadjiconstantinou, R. Karnik, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2017, 12, 509. 2022, 303, 122198.
[118] M. A. Siddiqui, P. Jaiswal, Mater. Sci. Eng., R 2021, 1166, 012031. [157] Y. Yu, X. Zhang, P. Lu, D. He, L. Shen, Y. Li, Membranes 2022, 12,
[119] J. R. Werber, C. O. Osuji, M. Elimelech, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2016, 1, 1250.

16018. [158] M. Tian, T. Ma, K. Goh, Z. Pei, J. Y. Chong, Y. N. Wang, Membranes
[120] H. Strathmann, Desalination 2010, 264, 268. 2022, 12, 955.
[121] B. Van Der Bruggen, C. Vandecasteele, T. Van Gestel, W. Doyen, R. [159] R. Alfahel, R. S. Azzam, M. Hafiz, A. H. Hawari, R. P. Pandey, K. A.

Leysen, Environ. Prog. 2003, 22, 46. Mahmoud, M. K. Hassan, A. A. Elzatahry, J. Water Process Eng. 2020,
[122] P. S. Goh, A. F. Ismail, Desalination 2018, 434, 60. 38, 101551.
[123] C. A. Scholes, G. W. Stevens, S. E. Kentish, Fuel 2012, 96, 15. [160] P. Ranjan, T. K. Sahu, R. Bhushan, S. S. Yamijala, D. J. Late, P. Kumar,
[124] P. Marchetti, M. F. Jimenez Solomon, G. Szekely, A. G. Livingston, A. Vinu, Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1900353.

Chem. Rev. 2014, 114, 10735. [161] P. Ranjan, J. M. Lee, P. Kumar, A. Vinu, Adv. Mater. 2020, 32,
[125] H. Chang, H. Liang, F. Qu, B. Liu, H. Yu, X. Du, G. Li, S. A. Snyder, 2000531.

J. Membr. Sci. 2017, 540, 362. [162] P. Ranjan, S. Agrawal, A. Sinha, T. R. Rao, J. Balakrishnan, A. D.
[126] J. P. Sheth, Y. Qin, K. K. Sirkar, B. C. Baltzis, J. Membr. Sci. 2003, 211, Thakur, Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 12007.

251. [163] P. Kumar, J. Liu, P. Ranjan, Y. Hu, S. S. Yamijala, S. K. Pati, J.
[127] W. J. Koros, G. K. Fleming, J. Membr. Sci. 1993, 83, 1. Irudayaraj, G. J. Cheng, 2018, Small 14, 1703346.
[128] P. R. Kidambi, D. Jang, J. C. Idrobo, M. S. H. Boutilier, L. Wang, J. [164] S. Chahal, P. Ranjan, M. Motlag, S. S. R. K. C. Yamijala, D. J.

Kong, R. Karnik, Adv. Mater. 2017, 29, 1700277. Late, E. H. S. Sadki, G. J. Cheng, P. Kumar, Adv. Mater. 2021, 33,
[129] S. P. Adiga, C. Jin, L. A. Curtiss, N. A. Monteiro-Riviere, R. J. Narayan, 2102039.

Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 2009, 1, 568. [165] P. Ranjan, P. Verma, S. Agrawal, T. R. Rao, S. K. Samanta, A. D.
[130] F. P. Cuperus, H. H. Nijhuis, Trends Food Sci. Technol. 1993, 4, 277. Thakur, Mater. Chem. Phys. 2019, 226, 350.

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (25 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

[166] P. Ranjan, P. Tiwary, A. K. Chakraborty, R. Mahapatra, A. D. Thakur, [196] P. Kumar, J. Liu, M. Motlag, L. Tong, Y. Hu, X. Huang, A.
J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron. 2018, 29, 15946. Bandopadhyay, S. K. Pati, L. Ye, J. Irudayaraj, G. J. Cheng, Nano Lett.

[167] P. Ranjan, T. Tulika, R. Laha, J. Balakrishnan, J. Raman Spectrosc. 2019, 19, 283.
2017, 48, 586. [197] T. K. Sahu, M. Motlag, A. Bandyopadhyay, N. Kumar, G. J. Cheng, P.

[168] T. K. Sahu, P. Ranjan, P. Kumar, Emergent Mater. 2021, 4, 645. Kumar, Adv. Sci. 2022, 9, 2202695.
[169] P. Ranjan, V. Thomas, P. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem. B 2021, 9, 4608. [198] P. Kumar, G. Singh, X. Guan, S. Roy, J. Lee, I. Y. Kim, X. Li, F. Bu,
[170] P. Ranjan, J. Balakrishnan, A. D. Thakur, Mater. Today: Proc. 2019, R. Bahadur, S. A. Iyengar, J. Yi, D. Zhao, P. M. Ajayan, A. Vinu, Adv.

11, 833. Mater. 2024, https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202403881.
[171] P. Ranjan, A. Kumar, A. D. Thakur, Mater. Today: Proc. 2018, 5, 732. [199] S. Chahal, A. K. Nair, S. J. Ray, J. Yi, A. Vinu, P. Kumar, Chem. Eng.
[172] K. S. Subrahmanyam, P. Kumar, U. Maitra, A. Govindaraj, K. P. S. S. J. 2022, 450, 138447.

Hembram, U. V. Waghmare, C. N. R. Rao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. [200] R. Bhushan, A. Bandyopadhyay, S. Kallatt, A. K. Thakur, S. K. Pati, P.
S. A. 2011, 108, 2674. Kumar, npj 2D Mater. Appl. 2024, 8, 19.

[173] P. Kumar, A. Dey, J. Roques, L. Assaud, S. Franger, P. Parida, V. Biju, [201] Z. Li, X. Guan, G. Pandey, S. Chahal, A. Bandyopadhyay, K. Awasthi,
ACS Mater. Lett. 2022, 4, 263. P. Kumar, A. Vinu, Small 2024, 20, 2307610.

[174] P. Kumar, S. S. R. K. C. Yamijala, S. K. Pati, J. Phys. Chem. C 2016, [202] P. Kumar, L. S. Panchakarla, S. Venkataprasad Bhat, U. Maitra, K. S.
120, 16985. Subrahmanyam, C. N. R. Rao, Nanotechnology 2010, 21, 385701.

[175] P. Kumar, RSC Adv. 2013, 3, 11987. [203] A. Qurashi, K. S. Subrahmanyam, P. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem. C 2015,
[176] S. Chahal, T. Sahay, Z. Li, R. K. Sharma, E. Kumari, A. 3, 11959.

Bandyopadhyay, P. Kumari, S. Jyoti Ray, A. Vinu, P. Kumar, Small [204] Y. Hu, S. Lee, P. Kumar, Q. Nian, W. Wang, J. Irudayaraj, G. J. Cheng,
2024, https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202404337. Nanoscale 2015, 7, 19885.

[177] X. Guan, P. Kumar, Z. Li, T. K. A. Tran, S. Chahal, Z. Lei, C. Y. Huang, [205] S. Lee, P. Kumar, Y. Hu, G. J. Cheng, J. Irudayaraj, Chem. Commun.
C. H. Lin, J. K. Huang, L. Hu, Y. C. Chang, L. Wang, J. S. J. Britto, 2015, 51, 15494.
L. Panneerselvan, D. Chu, T. Wu, A. Karakoti, J. Yi, A. Vinu, Adv. Sci. [206] J. Liu, P. Kumar, Y. Hu, G. J. Cheng, J. Irudayaraj, J. Phys. Chem. C
2023, 10, 2205809. 2015, 119, 6331.

[178] K. Vishwakarma, S. Rani, S. Chahal, C. Y. Lu, S. J. Ray, C. S. Yang, P. [207] S. Chahal, T. K. Sahu, S. Kar, S. J. Ray, V. Biju, P. Kumar, J. Phys. Chem.
Kumar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2022, 24, 12816. C 2022, 126, 21084.

[179] P. Kumar, G. Singh, R. Bahadur, Z. Li, X. Zhang, C. I. Sathish, M. R. [208] H. Ranjan, P. Ranjan, T. K. Sahu, R. K. Sharma, P. Kumar, J. Mater.
Benzigar, T. Kim Anh Tran, N. T. Padmanabhan, S. Radhakrishnan, Res. 2023, 38, 1792.
J. C. Janardhanan, C. Ann Biji, A. Jini Mathews, H. John, E. Tavakkoli, [209] Y. Hu, P. Kumar, Y. Xuan, B. Deng, M. Qi, G. J. Cheng, Adv. Opt.
R. Murugavel, S. Roy, P. M. Ajayan, A. Vinu, Prog. Mater. Sci. 2024, Mater. 2016, 4, 1811.
146, 101331. [210] P. Kumar, Q. Nian, G. Xiong, T. S. Fisher, G. J. Cheng, Mater. Adv.

[180] T. K. Sahu, N. Kumar, S. Chahal, R. Jana, S. Paul, M. Mukherjee, A. 2023, 4, 2402.
H. Tavabi, A. Datta, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, I. Valov, A. Nayak, P. [211] K. Margeta, N. Zabukovec, M. Siljeg, A. Farkas, Water Treatment.
Kumar, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2023, 18, 1430. InTech 2013, https://doi.org/10.5772/50738.

[181] S. Chahal, A. Bandyopadhyay, C. S. Yang, P. Kumar, npj 2D Mater. [212] S. Dervin, D. D. Dionysiou, S. C. Pillai, Nanoscale 2016, 8, 15115.
Appl. 2023, 7, 55. [213] Y. Kang, Y. Xia, H. Wang, X. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29,

[182] S. Chahal, A. Bandyopadhyay, S. P. Dash, P. Kumar, J. Phys. Chem. 1902014.
Lett. 2022, 13, 6487. [214] K. A. Lokhandwala, I. Pinnau, Z. He, K. D. Amo, A. R. DaCosta, J. G.

[183] S. Chahal, R. Bhushan, P. Kumari, X. Guan, J. M. Lee, S. J. Ray, A. K. Wijmans, R. W. Baker, J. Membr. Sci. 2010, 346, 270.
Thakur, A. Vinu, P. Kumar, Matter 2024, 7, 237. [215] W. J. Koros, Y. H. Ma, T. Shimidzu, Pure Appl. Chem. 1996, 68, 1479.

[184] Q. Man, Y. An, H. Shen, C. Wei, S. Xiong, J. Feng, Mater. Today 2023, [216] O. Kwon, Y. Choi, J. Kang, J. H. Kim, E. Choi, Y. C. Woo, D. W. Kim,
67, 566. Desalination 2022, 522, 115448.

[185] H. J. W. Zandvliet, in Xenes (Eds: A. Molle, C. Grazianetti), Wood- [217] M. Imran, S. Ahmed, E. A. Al-Harthi, M. E. Khan, M. M. Alam, F.
head Publishing, Sawston, UK 2022, pp. 27–48. Haouala, A. A. Chaudhary, A. Asghar, Phys. Scr. 2023, 98, 075003.

[186] S. Chahal, S. M. Kauzlarich, P. Kumar, ACS Mater. Lett. 2021, 3, 631. [218] M. Sajid, S. M. Sajid Jillani, N. Baig, K. Alhooshani, Chemosphere
[187] S. Chahal, T. K. Sahu, S. Kar, H. Ranjan, S. J. Ray, P. Kumar, Eng. Rep. 2022, 287, 132140.

2024, 6, e12787. [219] J. Safaei, G. Wang, Nano Res. Energy 2022, 1, e9120008.
[188] P. Ranjan, P. Kumar, J. Mater. Res. 2022, 37, 3352. [220] A. Raza, J. Z. Hassan, A. Mahmood, W. Nabgan, M. Ikram, Desali-
[189] I. Pradhan, A. Mahapatra, A. Bandyopadhyay, A. Nayak, P. Kumar, nation 2022, 531, 115684.

ChemPhysChem 2023, 24, 202300447. [221] F. Dixit, K. Zimmermann, R. Dutta, N. J. Prakash, B. Barbeau,
[190] I. Pradhan, A. Mahapatra, P. P. Samal, P. Mishra, P. Kumar, A. Nayak, M. Mohseni, B. Kandasubramanian, J. Hazard. Mater. 2022, 423,

J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2024, 15, 165. 127050.
[191] S. Mishra, T. K. Sahu, P. Verma, P. Kumar, S. K. Samanta, ACS Omega [222] A. G. N. Wamba, G. P. Kofa, S. N. Koungou, P. S. Thue, E. C. Lima,

2019, 4, 10411. G. S. dos Reis, J. G. Kayem, J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 2018, 6, 3192.
[192] S. Mishra, P. Kumar, S. K. Samanta, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2020, 59, [223] J. Přech, P. Pizarro, D. P. Serrano, J. Čejka, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2018, 47,

15839. 8263.
[193] S. Mishra, S. Kumari, P. Kumar, S. K. Samanta, Sci. Total Environ. [224] M. Xu, J. Wang, J. Wu, Mater. Res. Express 2024, 11, 032001.

2021, 790, 147853. [225] S. H. Jamali, T. J. H. Vlugt, L. C. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C 2017, 121,
[194] T. K. Sahu, S. P. Sahu, K. P. S. S. Hembram, J. K. Lee, V. Biju, P. Kumar, 11273.

NPG Asia Mater. 2023, 15, 49. [226] X. Ji, Y. Bao, C. Du, Q. Shi, W. Xu, Z. Wang, Desalination 2022, 541,
[195] M. Motlag, P. Kumar, K. Y. Hu, S. Jin, J. Li, J. Shao, X. Yi, Y. H. Lin, 116023.

J. C. Walrath, L. Tong, X. Huang, R. S. Goldman, L. Ye, G. J. Cheng, [227] A. Khan, K. Huang, M. Hu, X. Yu, D. Yang, Langmuir 2018, 34, 5214.
Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1900597. [228] C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar, J. Hone, Science 2008, 321, 385.

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (26 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

[229] Y. Chen, J. Zou, S. J. Campbell, G. Le Caer, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2004, 84, [270] Z. Wu, X. Yuan, J. Zhang, H. Wang, L. Jiang, G. Zeng, ChemCatChem
2430. 2017, 9, 41.

[230] S. P. Koenig, L. Wang, J. Pellegrino, J. S. Bunch, Nat. Nanotechnol. [271] Q. Xia, B. Huang, X. Yuan, H. Wang, Z. Wu, L. Jiang, T. Xiong, J.
2012, 7, 728. Zhang, G. Zeng, H. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2018, 530, 481.

[231] A. Tavolaro, E. Drioli, Adv. Mater. 1999, 11, 975. [272] S. Yuan, L. Feng, K. Wang, J. Pang, M. Bosch, C. Lollar, Y. Sun, J. Qin,
[232] M. G. Buonomenna, W. Yave, G. Golemme, RSC Adv. 2012, 2, 10745. X. Yang, P. Zhang, Q. Wang, L. Zou, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Fang, J.
[233] H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O’Keeffe, O. M. Yaghi, Science 2013, Li, H. C. Zhou, Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1704303.

341, 1230444. [273] Z. Wu, X. Yuan, G. Zeng, L. Jiang, H. Zhong, Y. Xie, H. Wang, X.
[234] J. K. Holt, H. G. Park, Y. Wang, M. Stadermann, A. B. Artyukhin, C. Chen, H. Wang, Appl. Catal., B 2018, 225, 8.

P. Grigoropoulos, A. Noy, O. Bakajin, Science 2006, 312, 1034. [274] H. Wang, Y. Wu, T. Xiao, X. Yuan, G. Zeng, W. Tu, S. Wu, H. Y. Lee, Y.
[235] D. Anselmetti, A. Gölzhäuser, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2014, 53, Z. Tan, J. W. Chew, Appl. Catal., B 2018, 233, 213.

12300. [275] G. Férey, C. Serre, C. Mellot-Draznieks, F. Millange, S. Surblé, J.
[236] P. Kowalczyk, P. A. Gauden, A. P. Terzyk, S. Furmaniak, Phys. Chem. Dutour, I. Margiolaki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2004, 43, 6296.

Chem. Phys. 2010, 12, 11351. [276] G. Férey, C. Mellot-Draznieks, C. Serre, F. Millange, J. Dutour, S.
[237] M. Kim, Y. C. Ha, T. N. Nguyen, H. Y. Choi, D. Kim, Nanotechnology Surblé, I. Margiolaki, Science 2005, 309, 2040.

2013, 24, 505304. [277] C. Serre, F. Millange, C. Thouvenot, M. Noguès, G. Marsolier, D.
[238] J. R. Li, R. J. Kuppler, H. C. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2009, 38, 1477. Louër, G. Férey, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2002, 124, 13519.
[239] S. Ahmed, A. Ansari, A. S. Haidyrah, A. A. Chaudhary, M. Imran, A. [278] C. Wang, X. Liu, J. P. Chen, K. Li, Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 16613.

Khan, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater. 2022, 4, 2783. [279] S. Karan, S. Samitsu, X. Peng, K. Kurashima, I. Ichinose, Science
[240] A. Khan, S. Ahmed, B. Y. Sun, Y. C. Chen, W. T. Chuang, Y. H. Chan, D. 2012, 335, 444.

Gupta, P. W. Wu, H. C. Lin, Biosens. Bioelectron. 2022, 198, 113811. [280] R. R. Nair, H. A. Wu, P. N. Jayaram, I. V. Grigorieva, A. K. Geim,
[241] T. C. Merkel, B. D. Freeman, R. J. Spontak, Z. He, I. Pinnau, P. Science 2012, 335, 442.

Meakin, A. J. Hill, Science 2002, 296, 519. [281] P. Sun, M. Zhu, K. Wang, M. Zhong, J. Wei, D. Wu, Z. Xu, H. Zhu,
[242] Y. Q. Li, T. Yu, T. Y. Yang, L. X. Zheng, K. Liao, Adv. Mater. 2012, 24, ACS Nano 2013, 7, 428.

3426. [282] H. Huang, Y. Mao, Y. Ying, Y. Liu, L. Sun, X. Peng, Chem. Commun.
[243] K. W. Putz, O. C. Compton, M. J. Palmeri, S. T. Nguyen, L. C. Brinson, 2013, 49, 5963.

Adv. Funct. Mater. 2010, 20, 3322. [283] B. Sapkota, W. Liang, A. VahidMohammadi, R. Karnik, A. Noy, M.
[244] Z. An, O. C. Compton, K. W. Putz, L. C. Brinson, S. T. Nguyen, Adv. Wanunu, Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 2747.

Mater. 2011, 23, 3842. [284] Z. Cao, V. Liu, A. Barati Farimani, ACS Energy Lett. 2020, 5, 2217.
[245] L. M. Robeson, J. Membr. Sci. 2008, 320, 390. [285] A. Boretti, S. Al-Zubaidy, M. Vaclavikova, M. Al-Abri, S. Castelletto,
[246] L. M. Robeson, J. Membr. Sci. 1991, 62, 165. S. Mikhalovsky, npj Clean Water 2018, 1, 5.
[247] M. Yoshimune, K. Haraya, Energy Procedia 2013, 37, 1109. [286] X. Ma, D. Lu, J. Lu, Y. Qian, S. Zhang, Z. Yao, L. Liang, Z. Sun, L.
[248] O. Sanyal, C. Zhang, G. B. Wenz, S. Fu, N. Bhuwania, L. Xu, M. Zhang, Desalination 2023, 548, 116293.

Rungta, W. J. Koros, Carbon 2018, 127, 688. [287] J. Gilron, N. Gara, O. Kedem, J. Membr. Sci. 2001, 185, 223.
[249] W. J. Koros, R. Mahajan, J. Membr. Sci. 2000, 175, 181. [288] J. He, T. Arbaugh, D. Nguyen, W. Xian, E. M. V. Hoek, J. R.
[250] S. Xu, N. Zhao, L. Wu, S. Kang, Z. Zhang, G. Huo, Z. Dai, N. Li, J. McCutcheon, Y. Li, J. Membr. Sci. 2023, 674, 121498.

Membr. Sci. 2022, 659, 120781. [289] Y. Okamoto, J. H. Lienhard, Desalination 2019, 470, 114064.
[251] G. George, N. Bhoria, S. AlHallaq, A. Abdala, V. Mittal, Sep. Purif. [290] S. Akbari, M. Peyravi, Chem. Eng. Res. Des. 2020, 162, 94.

Technol. 2016, 158, 333. [291] K. E. Gurianov, A. A. Eliseev, V. A. Brotsman, A. A. Poyarkov, I. A.
[252] H. Buff, Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem. 1857, 102, 265. Ryzhov, T. A. Zotov, A. P. Chumakov, D. I. Petukhov, Desalination
[253] S. Ahmed, S. Khatun, S. Sallam, A. Ansari, Z. A. Ansari, R. R. Kumar, 2023, 547, 116238.

J. Hakami, A. Khan, Europhys. Lett. 2022, 139, 36001. [292] M. E. Suk, N. R. Aluru, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2010, 1, 1590.
[254] S. Ahmed, A. Ansari, M. A. Siddiqui, A. Khan, P. Ranjan, J. Mater. [293] C. Tewari, G. Tatrari, S. Kumar, M. Pathak, K. S. Rawat, Y. N. Kim, B.

Sci.: Mater. Electron. 2023, 34, 755. Saha, Y. C. Jung, P. Mukhopadhyay, N. G. Sahoo, Desalination 2023,
[255] H. Masuda, K. Fukuda, Science 1995, 268, 1466. 567, 116952.
[256] F. Keller, M. S. Hunter, D. L. Robinson, J. Electrochem. Soc. 1953, [294] R. K. Joshi, P. Carbone, F. C. Wang, V. G. Kravets, Y. Su, I. V.

100, 411. Grigorieva, H. A. Wu, A. K. Geim, R. R. Nair, Science 2014, 343, 752.
[257] J. M. Kape, Trans. IMF 1967, 45, 34. [295] H. Huang, Z. Song, N. Wei, L. Shi, Y. Mao, Y. Ying, L. Sun, Z. Xu, X.
[258] R. C. Furneaux, W. R. Rigby, A. P. Davidson, Nature 1989, 337, 147. Peng, Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 2979.
[259] N. Itoh, K. Kato, T. Tsuji, M. Hongo, J. Membr. Sci. 1996, 117, 189. [296] Y. C. An, X. X. Gao, W. L. Jiang, J. L. Han, Y. Ye, T. M. Chen, R. Y. Ren,
[260] A. T. Shawaqfeh, R. E. Baltus, J. Membr. Sci. 1999, 157, 147. J. H. Zhang, B. Liang, Z. L. Li, A. J. Wang, N. Q. Ren, Environ. Res.
[261] K. Dai, L. Shi, D. Zhang, J. Fang, Chem. Eng. Sci. 2006, 61, 428. 2023, 223, 115409.
[262] H. Li, L. Zou, Desalination 2011, 275, 62. [297] F. Arshad, C. Aubry, F. Ravaux, L. Zou, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2021,
[263] A. T. Nasrabadi, M. Foroutan, Desalination 2011, 277, 236. 590, 415.
[264] L. Joseph, J. Heo, Y. G. Park, J. R. V. Flora, Y. Yoon, Desalination 2011, [298] Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Huang, W. Liao, Y. Zhao, Chem. Eng. J.

281, 68. 2021, 422, 130082.
[265] J. Lee, S. Jeong, Z. Liu, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2016, 46, 999. [299] A. Y. Goren, E. Gungormus, V. Vatanpour, Y. Yoon, A. Khataee, ACS
[266] L. Dumée, V. Germain, K. Sears, J. Schütz, N. Finn, M. Duke, S. Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2024, 16, 20055.

Cerneaux, D. Cornu, S. Gray, J. Membr. Sci. 2011, 376, 241. [300] V. Vatanpour, S. A. Naziri Mehrabani, B. Keskin, N. Arabi, B.
[267] L. F. Dumée, K. Sears, J. Schütz, N. Finn, C. Huynh, S. Hawkins, M. Zeytuncu, I. Koyuncu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2021, 60, 13391.

Duke, S. Gray, J. Membr. Sci. 2010, 351, 36. [301] I. Ihsanullah, Chemosphere 2021, 263, 127970.
[268] R. C. Viadero, J. A. Noblet, Aquac. Eng. 2002, 26, 151. [302] S. N. Nam, C. M. Park, M. Jang, Y. Huang, A. Jang, A. Son, Y. Yoon,
[269] Y. Wu, H. Luo, H. Wang, RSC Adv. 2014, 4, 40435. Chem. Eng. J. 2023, 453, 139740.

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (27 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

[303] L. Huang, L. Ding, J. Caro, H. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2023, [330] S. P. Singh, S. Ramanan, Y. Kaufman, C. J. Arnusch, ACS Appl. Nano
62, 202311138. Mater. 2018, 1, 1713.

[304] I. Ihsanullah, M. Bilal, Chemosphere 2022, 303, 135234. [331] H. Jiang, L. Tong, H. Liu, J. Xu, S. Jin, C. Wang, X. Hu, L. Ye, H. Deng,
[305] G. P. Lim, C. F. Soon, A. A. Al-Gheethi, M. Morsin, K. S. Tee, Ceram. G. J. Cheng, Matter 2020, 2, 1535.

Int. 2022, 48, 16477. [332] S. P. Surwade, S. N. Smirnov, I. V. Vlassiouk, R. R. Unocic, G.
[306] H. Xin, W. Li, Appl. Phys. Rev. 2018, 5, 031105. M. Veith, S. Dai, S. M. Mahurin, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2015, 10,
[307] E. S. Polsen, D. Q. McNerny, B. Viswanath, S. W. Pattinson, A. H. 459.

Hart, Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 10257. [333] R. Rozada, P. Solís-Fernández, J. I. Paredes, A. Martínez-Alonso, H.
[308] A. R. Esfahani, C. Ma, U. A. Flewellen, S. Nair, T. A. L. Harris, J. Ago, J. M. D. Tascón, Carbon 2014, 79, 664.

Membr. Sci. 2023, 678, 121669. [334] G. Xie, R. Yang, P. Chen, J. Zhang, X. Tian, S. Wu, J. Zhao, M. Cheng,
[309] Y. R. Lim, J. K. Han, S. K. Kim, Y. B. Lee, Y. Yoon, S. J. Kim, B. K. Min, W. Yang, D. Wang, C. He, X. Bai, D. Shi, G. Zhang, Small 2014, 10,

Y. Kim, C. Jeon, S. Won, J. H. Kim, W. Song, S. Myung, S. S. Lee, K. 2280.
S. An, J. Lim, Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1705270. [335] Y. Yamada, K. Murota, R. Fujita, J. Kim, A. Watanabe, M. Nakamura,

[310] Y. Gao, Z. Liu, D. M. Sun, L. Huang, L. P. Ma, L. C. Yin, T. Ma, Z. S. Sato, K. Hata, P. Ercius, J. Ciston, C. Y. Song, K. Kim, W. Regan,
Zhang, X. L. Ma, L. M. Peng, H. M. Cheng, W. Ren, Nat. Commun. W. Gannett, A. Zettl, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 2232.
2015, 6, 8569. [336] S. C. O’Hern, M. S. H. Boutilier, J. C. Idrobo, Y. Song, J. Kong, T.

[311] F. Bonaccorso, A. Bartolotta, J. N. Coleman, C. J. A. M. Backes, Adv. Laoui, M. Atieh, R. Karnik, Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 1234.
Mater. 2016, 28, 6136. [337] O. Lehtinen, E. Dumur, J. Kotakoski, A. V. Krasheninnikov, K.

[312] D. Gupta, S. Kumari, M. Gulrajani, Coloration Technology 2001, 117, Nordlund, J. Keinonen, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics
333. Research Section B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms 2011,

[313] J. Li, F. Ye, S. Vaziri, M. Muhammed, M. C. Lemme, M. Östling, Adv. 269, 1327.
Mater. 2013, 25, 3985. [338] O. Lehtinen, I. L. Tsai, R. Jalil, R. R. Nair, J. Keinonen, U. Kaiser, I. V.

[314] F. Torrisi, T. Hasan, W. Wu, Z. Sun, A. Lombardo, T. S. Kulmala, G. Grigorieva, Nanoscale 2014, 6, 6569.
W. Hsieh, S. Jung, F. Bonaccorso, P. J. Paul, D. Chau, A. C. Ferrari, [339] Y. Liu, R. Ghosh, D. Wu, A. Ismach, R. Ruoff, K. Lai, Nano Lett 2014,
ACS Nano 2012, 6, 2992. 14, 4682.

[315] T. Juntunen, H. Jussila, M. Ruoho, S. Liu, G. Hu, T. Albrow-Owen, [340] J. Bai, X. Zhong, S. Jiang, Y. Huang, X. Duan, Graphene Nanomesh
L. W. Ng, R. C. T. Howe, T. Hasan, Z. Sun, I. Tittonen, Adv. Funct. 2010, 5, 190.
Mater. 2018, 28, 1800480. [341] T. H. Han, Y. K. Huang, A. T. Tan, V. P. Dravid, J. J. J. o. t. A. C. S.

[316] M. Fathizadeh, H. N. Tien, K. Khivantsev, J. T. Chen, M. Yu, J Mater. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 15264.
Chem A. 2017, 5, 20860. [342] Y. Li, K. Yin, L. Wang, X. Lu, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, D. Yan, Y. Song, S. J. A.

[317] C. Wang, M. J. Park, D. H. Seo, H. K. J. S. Shon, Separation and Pu- C. B. E. Luo, Appl. Catal., B 2018, 239, 537.
rification Technology 2021, 254, 117604. [343] X. Zhao, C. M. Hayner, M. C. Kung, H. H. Kung, ACS Nano 2011, 5,

[318] G. Hu, L. Yang, Z. Yang, Y. Wang, X. Jin, J. Dai, Q. Wu, S. Liu, X. Zhu, 8739.
X. Wang, T. C. Wu, R. C. T. Howe, T. Albrow-Owen, L. W. T. Ng, Q. [344] Y. Xu, C. Y. Chen, Z. Zhao, Z. Lin, C. Lee, X. Xu, C. Wang, Y. Huang,
Yang, L. G. Occhipinti, R. I. Woodward, E. J. R. Kelleher, Z. Sun, X. M. I. Shakir, X. J. N. l. Duan, Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 4605.
Huang, M. Zhang, C. D. Bain, T. Hasan, Sci Adv. 2020, 12, eaba5029. [345] C. E. Ren, M. Q. Zhao, T. Makaryan, J. Halim, M. Boota, S. Kota, B.

[319] F. Withers, H. Yang, L. Britnell, A. P. Rooney, E. Lewis, A. Felten, C. R. Anasori, M. W. Barsoum, Y. J. C. Gogotsi, ChemElectroChem 2016,
Woods, V. Sanchez Romaguera, T. Georgiou, A. Eckmann, Y. J. Kim, 3, 689.
S. G. Yeates, S. J. Haigh, A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov, C. Casiraghi, [346] A. Matin, Z. Khan, S. M. J. Zaidi, M. C. Boyce, Desalination 2011,
Nano Letters 2014, 14, 3987. 281, 1.

[320] D. McManus, S. Vranic, F. Withers, V. Sanchez-Romaguera, M. [347] J. N. Israelachvili, in Intermolecular and Surface Forces, 3rd ed. (Ed: J.
Macucci, H. Yang, R. Sorrentino, K. Parvez, S. K. Son, G. Iannaccone, N. Israelachvili), Academic Press, San Diego, CA 2011, pp. 71–90.
K. Kostarelos, G. Fiori, C. Casiraghi, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2017, 12, 343. [348] H. Q. Ta, R. G. Mendes, Y. Liu, X. Yang, J. Luo, A. Bachmatiuk, T.

[321] J. Li, M. M. Naiini, S. Vaziri, M. C. Lemme, M. Östling, Adv. Funct. Gemming, M. Zeng, L. Fu, L. Liu, M. H. Rümmeli, Adv. Sci. 2021, 8,
Mater. 2014, 24, 6524. 2100619.

[322] J. Lin, Z. Peng, Y. Liu, F. Ruiz-Zepeda, R. Ye, E. L. Samuel, M. J. [349] S. Goutham, A. Keerthi, A. Ismail, A. Bhardwaj, H. Jalali, Y. You, Y.
Yacaman, B. I. Yakobson, J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 5714. Li, N. Hassani, H. Peng, M. V. S. Martins, F. Wang, M. Neek-Amal,

[323] R. Ye, D. K. James, J. M. Tour, Acc Chem. Res. 2018, 51, 1609. B. Radha, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2023, 18, 596.
[324] S. L Silvestre, T. Pinheiro, A. C. Marques, J. Deuermeier, J. Coelho, [350] K. Gopinadhan, S. Hu, A. Esfandiar, M. Lozada-Hidalgo, F. C. Wang,

R. Martins, L. Pereira, E. Fortunato, Flex. Print. Electron. 2022, 7, Q. Yang, A. V. Tyurnina, A. Keerthi, B. Radha, A. K. Geim, Science
035021. 2019, 363, 145.

[325] L. Cheng, W. Guo, X. Cao, Y. Dou, L. Huang, Y. Song, J. Su, Z. Zeng, [351] L. Fumagalli, A. Esfandiar, R. Fabregas, S. Hu, P. Ares, A.
R. Ye, Mater. Chem. Front. 2021, 5, 4874. Janardanan, Q. Yang, B. Radha, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe,

[326] Y. Peng, W. Zhao, F. Ni, W. Yu, X. Liu, ACS Nano 2021, 15, 19490. G. Gomila, K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, Science 2018, 360,
[327] A. K. Thakur, S. P. Singh, C. Thamaraiselvan, M. N. Kleinberg, C. J. 1339.

Arnusch, J. Membr. Sci. 2019, 591, 117322. [352] A. Esfandiar, B. Radha, F. C. Wang, Q. Yang, S. Hu, S. Garaj, R. R.
[328] K. Rathinam, S. P. Singh, Y. Li, R. Kasher, J. M. Tour, C. J. J. C. Nair, A. K. Geim, K. Gopinadhan, Science 2017, 358, 511.

Arnusch, Carbon 2017, 124, 515. [353] S. Shin, O. Shardt, P. B. Warren, H. A. Stone, Nat. Commun. 2017,
[329] N. H. Barbhuiya, S. P. Singh, A. Makovitzki, P. Narkhede, Z. Oren, Y. 8, 15181.

Adar, E. Lupu, L. Cherry, A. Monash, C. J. Arnusch, Materials 2021, [354] H. Geng, Q. Xu, M. Wu, H. Ma, P. Zhang, T. Gao, L. Qu, T. Ma, C.
14, 3179. Li, Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 1512.

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (28 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

Pranay Ranjan is presently an assistant professor at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. He got
a Ph.D. (Physics) from the Indian Institute of Technology Patna in Feb 2019. He then carried out his
post-doctoral research at the College of Science, UAE University where he worked until he got an offer
from IIT Jodhpur. His research thrust includes exploring novel large-scale synthetic approaches for
various 2D materials (including graphene, graphene oxide, borophene, borophene oxide, alpha lead
oxide, white lead, and their hybrids) and their frontline applications in molecular as well as gas sens-
ing, wettability manipulation, electronics/optoelectronics/spintronic devices, and environmental
remediation.

Zhixuan Li is a Ph.D. candidate at the Global Innovative Centre for Advanced Nanomaterials, the Uni-
versity of Newcastle. She received her Bachelor’s degree in Chemistry from the University of Science
and Technology of China, and Master’s degree in Chemical Engineering from the Monash University.
Currently, she is working on the development of 2D materials for energy applications.

Shashikant P. Patole is an assistant professor (Physics) at the Khalifa University of Science and Tech-
nology (KUST). He earned his Ph.D. from the Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Suwon, South Korea
in 2010. He then carried out postdoctoral research at the King Abdulla University of Science and Tech-
nology (KAUST). His research interests embrace condensed matter physics, nano science and tech-
nology, quantum materials, development and commercialization of advanced materials, structural
composites, membranes, energy, optoelectronics, electron field emission, photovoltaics, electron
microscopy, and artificial intelligence.

Gary J. Cheng works at the School of Industrial Engineering and Birck Nanotechnology Centre at Pur-
due University, USA. He received his Ph.D. from the Columbia University. He has received the Young
Investigator Award from the Office of Naval Research, the CAREER award from the National Science
Foundation, and the Outstanding YOUNG Manufacturing Engineer award from the Society of Manu-
facturing Engineers. His research includes laser materials processing, hybrid manufacturing systems,
rapid manufacturing of 3D bulk structural nanomaterials, multilayer functional coating, and mechani-
cal/physical property enhancement of metals.

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (29 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



www.advancedsciencenews.com www.small-journal.com

El Hadi S. Sadki obtained his Ph.D. degree in Physics from the Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge
University in 2002. He worked as a postdoctoral researcher at both the National Institute for Materi-
als Science (NIMS) in Tsukuba, Japan, and the Physics Department at Harvard University. In 2008, he
joined the Physics Department at UAE University as an Assistant Professor and got promoted to an
Associate Professor in 2015. Dr. Sadki’s current research interests are in the synthesis, characteriza-
tion, and device applications of nanomaterials, including carbon nanotubes, graphene, and supercon-
ducting nanowires.

Ajayan Vinu is the Director of GICAN at the University of Newcastle. He was previously working as a
full professor and ARC Future Fellow at the University of South Australia and the University of Queens-
land. Before coming to Australia, he had been working as a research group leader at the National Insti-
tute for Materials Science in Japan. His research is mainly focused on developing new approaches
to create nanoporosity in carbon nitrides, conducting polymers, metal nitrides, metal silicates,
graphenes, silicas, sulfides, fullerenes, and biomolecules with tunable structures and pore diameters
and their potential applications in energy, environmental, biomedical and catalysis technology.

Prashant Kumar works at University of Newcastle (Australia) from Aug 2021. Awarded Ph.D. (Physics,
2009), he had postdoctoral stints with world-renowned scientist Prof. C.N.R. Rao at JNCASR Banga-
lore (2009–2012) and Prof. Gary Cheng at Purdue University (USA). Being awarded the prestigious
“The Ramanujan Fellowship” in 2015, he returned to India and joined IIT Patna, where he worked for
6 years. He has grossly been involved in crystal growth of 2D materials under extreme thermodynamic
conditions, exotic quantum states in undoped/doped/hybrid atomic sheets and their applications
in electronics/spintronics/excitonics/straintronics, ultrafast sensing, energy generation/storage,
catalysis, water filtration, bacterial killing, and brain imaging.

Small 2024, 20, 2407160 2407160 (30 of 30) © 2024 The Author(s). Small published by Wiley-VCH GmbH

 16136829, 2024, 51, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/smll.202407160 by National Research Centre for, Wiley Online Library on [11/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License



J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications  

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jmaa

Regular Articles

General Casorati inequalities and implications for Riemannian 
maps and Riemannian submersions
Ravindra Singh a, Kiran Meena b,∗, Kapish Chand Meena c

a Department of Mathematics, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, 221005, India
b Department of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Jodhpur, Rajasthan, 342030, India
c Scientific Analysis Group, Defence Research and Development Organisation, Delhi, 110054, India

a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t 

Article history: This paper presents general forms of Casorati inequalities for Riemannian maps 
Received 10 June 2025 and Riemannian submersions between Riemannian manifolds. Using these general 
Available online 15 January 2026 forms, we obtain Casorati inequalities for Riemannian maps (resp. submersions) 
Submitted by O. Palmas whose target (resp. source) spaces are generalized complex and generalized Sasakian 
The second and third authors space forms. As a consequence, we give Casorati inequalities for Riemannian maps 
dedicate this article to the welcome (resp. submersions) when the target (resp. source) spaces are real, complex, real 
of their first child (namely, Madhav Kähler, Sasakian, Kenmotsu, cosymplectic, and almost C(α) space forms. To 
Meena) support these general forms, in the particular cases when the target or source 

spaces are real, complex, Sasakian, and Kenmotsu space forms, we verify known 
Keywords:
Riemannian manifolds Casorati inequalities for Riemannian maps and Riemannian submersions. Further, 
Space forms we give Casorati inequalities for invariant and anti-invariant Riemannian maps 
Casorati and scalar curvatures (resp. submersions) whose target (resp. source) spaces are generalized complex and 
Riemannian submersions generalized Sasakian space forms. Toward information on geometric characteristics, 
Riemannian maps we discuss the equality cases. We also exemplify the general forms.

© 2026 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data 
mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

1. Introduction

In differential geometry, Gaussian curvature is a fundamental tool because it provides information about 
the shape of a surface and its points. However, it may vanish even on curved surfaces. To solve this is
sue, Casorati [5] introduced the concept of Casorati curvature for regular surfaces, which is an extrinsic 
invariant, useful for the visualization of shapes and appearances, and vanishes only at planar points [7,29]. 
Thereafter, various geometers obtained inequalities involving normalized Casorati curvatures (now known 
as Casorati inequalities) for various submanifolds of ambient spaces such as real, complex, generalized com
plex, cosymplectic, Sasakian, Kenmotsu, generalized Sasakian, etc. (see [2,3,7,14,18--24,36,40,43,44]). The 

* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses : khandelrs@bhu.ac.in (R. Singh), kirankapishmeena@gmail.com, kiranmeena@iitj.ac.in (K. Meena), 

meenakapishchand@gmail.com (K.C. Meena).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmaa.2026.130436
0022-247X/© 2026 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar tech
nologies.



2 R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 

Casorati inequalities were also obtained for the submanifolds of other ambient spaces, such as quasi-real, 
quaternionic, generalized (κ, μ), statistical space forms, etc. For a detailed survey, we refer to [6].

Riemannian submersions are smooth maps and have applications in various fields, including physics, 
mechanics, relativity, spacetime, robotics, supergravity, superstring, Kaluza-Klein, Yang-Mills theories, etc. 
The concept of a Riemannian map generalizes that of a submanifold and a Riemannian submersion [12]. It 
has rich geometry and applications [13,35], and satisfies the eikonal equation (a bridge between geometric 
and physical optics). In addition, Riemannian maps allow us to compare the geometric properties of the 
source and target Riemannian manifolds. Due to the interesting properties mentioned above, Riemannian 
submersions and Riemannian maps were investigated with various structures (see [9,10,25,35] and references 
therein).

Recently, the Casorati inequalities for Riemannian submersions and Riemannian maps were obtained 
with the real and complex space forms in [17] and with the Sasakian space forms in [30]. Such inequalities 
were also obtained for Riemannian maps to Kenmotsu and nearly Kähler space forms in [42] and [11], 
respectively. It was concluded that these inequalities may provide a basis for bridges between geometry and 
physics. Motivatingly, in this paper, we obtain general forms of Casorati inequalities for Riemannian maps 
and Riemannian submersions, and show that these general inequalities give relationships between normalized 
scalar and normalized Casorati curvatures (see Theorems 4, 14, and 24). These general forms are helpful in 
obtaining Casorati inequalities for these smooth mappings with other space forms, similar to submanifold 
theory. For example, we use these general forms to obtain Casorati inequalities with generalized complex 
and generalized Sasakian space forms (see Theorems 5, 9, 15, 20, 25, and 27). By direct implications, we 
also obtain Casorati inequalities for Riemannian maps and Riemannian submersions with real, complex, 
real Kähler, Sasakian, Kenmotsu, cosymplectic, and almost C(α) space forms (see Corollaries 6, 10, 16, 21, 
26, and 28). In addition, in particular cases (real, complex, Sasakian and Kenmotsu space forms), we verify 
the obtained inequalities with the inequalities given in [17], [30] and [42] (see Remarks 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, and 
22). Further, we obtain Casorati inequalities for invariant and anti-invariant cases (see Propositions 8, 12, 
18, and 23). We also discuss the equality cases and observe that they give information about some geometric 
characteristics.

First, we recall the notions of the space forms mentioned above.

Definition 1. [28,37,41] Let (M, g, J) be an even-dimensional Riemannian manifold with an almost complex 
structure J , J2 = −I, the identity map. Then it is called an almost Hermitian manifold if, for all 𝒵1,𝒵2 ∈
Γ(TM),

g(J𝒵1, J𝒵2) = g(𝒵1,𝒵2).

Furthermore, it is called a generalized complex space form (denoted by M(c1, c2)) if there exist smooth 
functions c1 and c2 on M such that for all 𝒵1,𝒵2,𝒵3 ∈ Γ(TM) its curvature tensor R satisfies

R(𝒵1,𝒵2)𝒵3 = c1{g(𝒵2,𝒵3)𝒵1 − g(𝒵1,𝒵3)𝒵2}
+ c2{g(𝒵1, J𝒵3)J𝒵2 − g(𝒵2, J𝒵3)J𝒵1 + 2g(𝒵1, J𝒵2)J𝒵3}. (1)

In particular, we also have the following notions [37,39,41].

1. If c1 = c and c2 = 0, then M(c) is a real space form.
2. If c1 = c2 = c 

4 , then M(c) is a complex space form.
3. If c1 = c+3α

4 and c2 = c−α
4 , then M(c) is a real Kähler space form.



R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 3

Definition 2. [1,4] Let (M,ϕ, ξ, η, g) be an odd-dimensional Riemannian manifold with a (1, 1) tensor field 
ϕ, a structure vector field ξ, and 1-form η. Then it is called an almost contact metric manifold if, for all 
𝒵,𝒵1,𝒵2 ∈ Γ(TM),

η(ξ) = 1, ϕ2(𝒵) = −𝒵 + η(𝒵)ξ and g(ϕ𝒵1, ϕ𝒵2) = g(𝒵1,𝒵2) − η(𝒵1)η(𝒵2).

In this case, we also have ϕξ = 0 and η ◦ ϕ = 0. Furthermore, it is called a generalized Sasakian space form 
(denoted by M(c1, c2, c3)) if there exist smooth functions c1, c2 and c3 on M such that for all 𝒵1,𝒵2,𝒵3 ∈
Γ(TM) its curvature tensor R satisfies

R(𝒵1,𝒵2)𝒵3 = c1{g(𝒵2,𝒵3)𝒵1 − g(𝒵1,𝒵3)𝒵2}
+ c2{g(𝒵1, ϕ𝒵3)ϕ𝒵2 − g(𝒵2, ϕ𝒵3)ϕ𝒵1 + 2g(𝒵1, ϕ𝒵2)ϕ𝒵3}
+ c3{η(𝒵1)η(𝒵3)𝒵2 − η(𝒵2)η(𝒵3)𝒵1 + g(𝒵1,𝒵3)η(𝒵2)ξ − g(𝒵2,𝒵3)η(𝒵1)ξ}. (2)

In particular, we also have the following notions [1,4].

1. If c1 = c+3
4 and c2 = c3 = c−1

4 , then M(c) is a Sasakian space form.
2. If c1 = c−3

4 and c2 = c3 = c+1
4 , then M(c) is a Kenmotsu space form.

3. If c1 = c2 = c3 = c 
4 , then M(c) is a cosymplectic space form.

4. If c1 = c+3α2

4 and c2 = c3 = c−α2

4 , then M(c) is an almost C(α) space form.

We also use the following lemma in the further sections.

Lemma 3. [38] Let Λ = {(z1, . . . , zr) ∈ Rr : z1 + · · · + zr = k} be a hyperplane of Rr, and f : Rr → R be a 
quadratic form given by

∑︂r−1 ∑︂
f(z1, . . . , zr) = λ z2

i + λ 2
1 2zr − 2 zizj , λ1, λ2 ∈ R+.
i=1 1≤i<j≤r

Then the constrained extremum problem min f has the global solution z1 = z2 = · · · = zr−1 =
(z1,...,zr)∈Λ

k
λ1+1 , zr = k

λ2+1 = k(r−1)
(λ1+1)λ = k(λ1−r+2)

λ1+1 , provided that λ2 = r−1 
2 λ1−r+2 .

2. General Casorati inequalities and implications for Riemannian maps

This section is divided into three subsections. The first subsection is dedicated to the general form of 
Casorati inequalities for Riemannian maps between Riemannian manifolds. The second and third subsections 
are dedicated to the implications: Casorati inequalities when the target spaces are generalized complex and 
generalized Sasakian space forms, respectively. Now we start with some preliminaries.

Let F : (Mm1
1 , g1) → (Mm2

2 , g2) be a smooth map between Riemannian manifolds with rank 3 ≤ r ≤
min{m1,m2}, and let F∗p : TpM1 → TF (p)M2 be its derivative map at p. Denoting the kernel space of F∗
at p ∈ M1 by (kerF∗p) and its orthogonal complementary space in TpM1 by (kerF∗p)⊥, we decompose at 
p ∈ M1

TpM1 = (kerF∗p) ⊕ (kerF∗p)⊥.

Similarly we decompose at F (p) ∈ M2,

TF (p)M2 = (range F∗p) ⊕ (range F∗p)⊥.



4 R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 

Then, the map F is called a Riemannian map, if for all X,Y ∈ Γ(kerF∗)⊥ the following equation holds [12]:

g1(X,Y ) = g2(F∗X,F∗Y ). (3)
(︁ )︁

The bundle Hom TM1, F
−1TM2 admits an induced connection ∇ from the Levi-Civita connection ∇M1

on M1. Then symmetric second fundamental form of F is given by [26]
(︂ )︂

(∇F∗) (𝒵1,𝒵2) = ∇M2 F M
F∗𝒵 ∗𝒵 1

2 − F∗ ∇𝒵 𝒵 (4)
1 1 2

for 𝒵1,𝒵2 ∈ Γ(TM1), where ∇M2 is the Levi-Civita connection on M2. In addition, by [32] (∇F∗) (X,Y )
is completely contained in (range F∗)⊥ for all X,Y ∈ Γ (kerF∗)⊥. Also, for V ∈ Γ(range F∗)⊥, we have the 
shape operator 𝒮 defined as [35, p. 188]:

∇M2
F∗X

V = −𝒮V F∗X + ∇F⊥
X V.

Furthermore, the Gauss equation for F is defined as [35, p. 189]
(︁ )︁ (︁ )︁

g RM
2 2 (F∗Z1, F∗Z2)F∗Z3, F∗Z = g1 RM

4 1 (Z1, Z2)Z3, Z4 + g2 ((∇F∗) (Z1, Z3) , (∇F∗) (Z2, Z4))
−g2 ((∇F∗) (Z1, Z4) , (∇F∗) (Z2, Z3)) , (5)

where Zi ∈ Γ (kerF∗)⊥. Here, RM1 and RM2 denote the curvature tensors of M1 and M2, respectively.
At a point p ∈ M1, suppose that {Zi}ri=1 is an orthonormal basis of the horizontal space. Then scalar 

curvatures 2 scalℋ and 2 scalℛ on the horizontal and range spaces are given, respectively, by

∑︂r
2 scalℋ

(︁ )︁
= g1 RM1(Zi, Zj)Zj , Zi , (6)

i,j=1

and
∑︂r (︁ )︁

2 scalℛ = g M
2 R 2(F∗Zi, F∗Zj)F∗Zj , F∗Zi .

i,j=1

Consequently, we define normalized scalar curvatures for these spaces as

ρℋ = 2 scalℋ
r (r − 1) , (7)

and

ρℛ = 2 scalℛ
r (r − 1) .

Supposing {Vr+1, . . . , Vm2} an orthonormal basis of (range F∗)⊥ we set,

Bℋα

ij = g2 ((∇F∗)(Zi, Zj), Vα) , i, j = 1, . . . , r, α = r + 1, . . . ,m2,

⃦⃦
Bℋ⃦⃦2 ∑︂r

= g2 ((∇F∗)(Zi, Zj), (∇F∗)(Zi, Zj)) ,
i,j=1

∑︂r
trace Bℋ = (∇F∗) (Zi, Zi) .

i=1 



R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 5

Then the Casorati curvature of the horizontal space is defined as

⃦⃦ m )︂
Cℋ = 1

Bℋ⃦⃦2 α
= 1 ∑︂2 ∑︂r (︂

Bℋ 2
ij .

r r
α=r+1 i,j=1

Let Lℋ be a k dimensional subspace (k ≥ 2) of the horizontal space with orthonormal basis {Z1, . . . , Zk}. 
Then its Casorati curvature CLℋ is given by

∑︂m2 ∑︂k (︂ )︂
CLℋ

= 1 
Bℋα 2

k ij .
α=r+1 i,j=1

Moreover, the normalized Casorati curvatures δℋC (r− 1) and δ̂ℋC (r− 1) associated with the horizontal space 
at a point p are given by

[︁ ]︁
δℋC (r − 1) = 1 ℋ + (r + 1) { Lℋ ℋ

p 2Cp 2 inf C |L a hyperplane of (kerF∗p)⊥}, (8)
r 

and
[︂ ]︂
δ̂ℋC (r − 1) = 2 1

Cℋ r
p − (2 − ) su {CLℋ

Lℋ
p 2 p | a hyperplane of (kerF∗p)⊥}. (9)

r 

In the sequel, for any 𝒵 ∈ Γ(TM2), we write

J2𝒵 = ϕ2𝒵 = Pℛ𝒵 + Qℛ𝒵, (10)

where Pℛ𝒵∑︁∈ Γ(range F∗), Qℛ𝒵 ∈ Γ
r

( 2 ∑︁(range F∗)⊥ and Pℛ is the endomorphism on (range F∗) such that 
r r

∥Pℛ∥2 (︁
g2(F∗Zi, J2F∗Zj)) = ( 2 ∑︁

= g2(F∗Zi, ϕ2F∗Zj)) = g2(F ℛ )︁2
∗Zi, P F∗Zj) .

i,j=1 i,j=1 i,j=1

2.1. General Casorati inequalities for Riemannian maps

In this subsection, we give general forms of the Casorati inequalities for the Riemannian maps as follows.

Theorem 4. Let F : (M m1
1 , g1) → (M m2

2 , g2) be a Riemannian map between Riemannian manifolds with 
rank r ≥ 3. Then

ρℋ ≤ δℋC (r − 1) + ρℛ and ρℋ ≤ δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + ρℛ. (11)

The equality holds in any of the above two inequalities at a point p ∈ M1 if and only if, for suitable 
orthonormal bases, the following hold.

Bℋα

11 = Bℋα

22 = · · · = Bℋα

r−1 r−1 = 1
2B

ℋα

rr ,

Bℋα

ij = 0, 1 ≤ i ̸= j ≤ r.

The equality conditions can be interpreted as follows. The first condition gives g2(F∗Z1,𝒮V F∗Z1) =
α

g2(F∗Z2,𝒮V F Z · · =
α ∗ 2) = · g2(F∗Zr−1,𝒮V F Z ) = 1g

α ∗ r−1 2 2(F∗Zr,𝒮V F Z ) wit  re pec  to
α ∗ r h s t  all directions 

(Vα,where α ∈ {r + 1, . . . ,m2}). Equivalently, there exist (m2 − r) mutually orthogonal unit vector fields 
in (range F∗)⊥ such that shape operators with respect to all directions have an eigenvalue of multiplicity 



6 R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 

(r−1) and that for each Vα the distinguished eigendirections are the same (namely F∗Zr). Hence, the leaves 
of range spaces are invariantly quasi-umbilical [7]. The second condition gives g2(F∗Zj ,𝒮V F∗Zi) = 0 with 

α

respect to all directions (Vα,where α ∈ {r + 1, . . . ,m2} in (range F∗)⊥). Equivalently, the shape operator 
matrices become diagonal, and hence commute.

Proof. At a point p ∈ M1, let {Z1, . . . , Zr}, {F∗Z1, . . . , F∗Zr} and {Vr+1, . . . , Vm2} be orthonormal bases 
for (kerF∗)⊥, (range F∗) and (range F∗)⊥, respectively. Then by putting Z1 = Z4 = Zi and Z2 = Z3 = Zj

in (5), we obtain
⃦⃦

2 scalℋ = 2 scalℛ + trace Bℋ⃦⃦2 − rCℋ. (12)

Now, consider the quadratic polynomial

𝒫ℛ = 1
2r(r − 1)Cℋ + 1

2(r2 − 1)CLℋ
+ 2 scalℛ − 2 scalℋ, (13)

and assume that the hyperplane Lℋ is spanned by {Z1, . . . , Zr−1}. Then using (12), we obtain

𝒫ℛ ⃦⃦
= 1

2r(r − 1)Cℋ + 1
2(r2 − 1)CLℋ − trace Bℋ⃦⃦2 + rCℋ

∑︂m2 ∑︂r−1 {︃ (︂ )︂
α 2 (︂ )︂ }︃

= r Bℋ α 2
ii + (r + 1) Bℋ

ir
α=r+1

∑︂ ⎧i=1 
m2 ⎨ ∑︂r−1 (︂ )︂ ⎫

2 ∑︂r
+ ⎩ α

2 (r + 1) Bℋ
ij − α α

2 (r − 1) (︂ )︂2⎬
Bℋ

ii Bℋ
2 Bℋα

jj + .
 rr ⎭

α=r+1 1=i<j 1=i<j

Thus,

∑︂ ⎧
m2 ⎨ ∑︂r−1 (︂ )︂ (︂ )︂2 ∑︂ ⎫

𝒫ℛ ≥ ⎩r Bℋα 2 − ) ℋα

ii + (r 1 r ⎬
− α α

r
 2 B 2 Bℋ

ii Bℋ
 r jj ⎭ .

α=r+1 i=1 1=i<j

Let f : Rr → R be a quadratic form for each r + 1 ≤ α ≤ m2 such that

f(Bℋα ∑︂r−1 (︂ )︂
11 , . . . , Bℋα α 2

rr ) = (r 1) (︂ )︂ ∑︂r
r Bℋ ℋα 2 α

ii + −
2 B − 2 ℋ
 rr Bii Bℋα

jj ,
i=1 1=i<j

and constrained extremum problem min f subject to Bℋα

11 + · · ·+Bℋα

rr = kα ∈ R. Then using Lemma 3, we 
get the global minimum critical point,

Bℋα

11 = · · · = Bℋα

r−1 r−1 = kα

r + 1 , Bℋα

rr = 2kα
r + 1 .

Moreover, f(Bℋα

11 , . . . , Bℋα

rr ) = 0. Consequently, we obtain

𝒫ℛ ≥ 0. (14)

Then (13) and (14) yield,

ρℋ ≤ 1
2C

ℋ + (r + 1)
2 CLℋ

+ ρℛ. (15)
r 



R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 7

In a similar manner, considering the quadratic polynomial

𝒬ℛ ℋ
= 2r (r − 1)Cℋ − 1

2 (r − 1) (2r − 1)CL + 2 scalℛ − 2 scalℋ,

we obtain

𝒬ℛ ≥ 0, (16)

and

ρℋ ≤ 2Cℋ − (2r − 1) Lℋ

2 C + ρℛ. (17)
r 

Then (11) follows by taking the infimum in (15) and the supremum in (17) on all hyperplanes Lℋ. In 
addition, the equality cases are true by (14) and (16). □
2.2. Implications for Riemannian maps to generalized complex space forms

In this subsection, we obtain Casorati inequalities for Riemannian maps whose target spaces are gener
alized complex space forms (M m2

2 (c1, c2) , g2, J2) using the general inequalities obtained in Subsection 2.1. 
As corollaries of this subsection, we also obtain Casorati inequalities for Riemannian maps whose target 
spaces are real, complex, and real Kähler space forms. Remarkably, we also verify these inequalities with the 
known Casorati inequalities for Riemannian maps whose target spaces are real and complex space forms.

Now, we give the main result of this subsection.

Theorem 5. Let F : (M m1
1 , g1) → (M m2

2 (c1, c2) , g2, J2) be a Riemannian map from a Riemannian manifold 
to a generalized complex space form with rank r ≥ 3. Then

c2 c2
ρℋ ≤ δℋC (r − 1) + c1 + 3 ∥Pℛ∥2 and ρℋ ≤ δ̂ℋ

r (r − 1) C (r − 1) + c1 + 3 ∥Pℛ∥2.
r (r − 1)

The equality cases are the same as the equality cases of Theorem 4.

Proof. Since M2 is a generalized complex space form, using (1), (3), and (10) we obtain,

∑︂r ∑︂r
g (RM
2 2(F∗Zi, F∗Zj)F∗Zj , F∗Zi) = c1{g1(Zj , Zj)g1(Zi, Zi) − g1(Zi, Zj)g1(Zj , Zi)}

i,j=1 i,j=1

∑︂r {︁ (︁ )︁ (︁
+ c ℛ )︁ (︁ (︁ )︁

2 g ℛ
2 F∗Zi, P F∗Zj g2 P F Pℛ )︁

∗Zj , F∗Zi − g2 F∗Zj , F ℛ
∗Zj g2 P F∗Zi, F∗Zi

i,j=1(︁ )︁ (︁ )︁}︁
+2g2 F∗Zi, P

ℛF∗Zj g2 PℛF∗Zj , F∗Zi .

Equivalently,

2 scalℛ = r (r − 1) c1 + 3c 2
2∥Pℛ∥ .

Hence

ρℛ = c ℛ
1 + 3c2 ∥2.

r (r − 1)∥P

Then the required inequalities follow using the above equation in (11). □



8 R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 

We have the following straightforward corollary.

Corollary 6. Let F : (M m1
1 , g1) → (M m2

2 (c1, c2) , g2) be a Riemannian map.

1. If M2(c) is a real space form, then

ρℋ ≤ δℋC (r − 1) + c and ρℋ ≤ δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + c. (18)

2. If M2(c) is a complex space form, then

ρℋ ≤ δℋC (r − 1) + c 
4 + 3c 

4r (r − 1)∥P
ℛ∥2 and ρℋ ≤ δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + c 

4 + 3c 
4r (r − 1)∥P

ℛ∥2. (19)

3. If M2(c) is a real Kähler space form, then

ρℋ ≤ δℋC (r − 1) + (c + 3α)
4 + 3 (c− α)

4r (r − 1)∥P
ℛ∥2 and ρℋ ≤ δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + (c + 3α) + 3 (c− α)

 4 4r (r − 1)∥P
ℛ∥2.

 

In addition, the equality cases are the same as the equality cases of the previous theorem.

Remark 7. We observe that Eqs. (18) and (19) are the same as [17, Eq. (3.10)] and [17, Eq. (4.6)], respectively.

From [32], we recall that for an invariant Riemannian map we have J2(range F∗) = (range F∗) and for an 
anti-invariant Riemannian map we have J2(range F∗) ⊆ (range F∗)⊥. Taking into account this information, 
one can get the following inequalities similar to Theorem 5.

Proposition 8. Let F : (M m1
1 , g1) → (M m2

2 (c1, c2) , g2, J2) be a Riemannian map from a Riemannian 
manifold to a generalized complex space form with rank r ≥ 3.

1. If F is invariant, then

ρℋ ≤ δℋC (r − 1) + c1 + 3c2
(r − 1) and ρℋ ≤ δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + c1 + 3c2

(r − 1) .

2. If F is anti-invariant, then

ρℋ ≤ δℋC (r − 1) + c1 and ρℋ ≤ δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + c1.

The equality cases are the same as the equality cases of Theorem 4.

2.3. Implications for Riemannian maps to generalized Sasakian space forms

In this subsection, we obtain Casorati inequalities for Riemannian maps whose target spaces are gen
eralized Sasakian space forms (M m2

2 (c1, c2, c3) , ϕ2, ξ2, η2, g2) using the general inequalities obtained in 
Subsection 2.1. As corollaries of this subsection, we also obtain Casorati inequalities for Riemannian maps 
whose target spaces are Sasakian, Kenmotsu, cosymplectic, and almost C(α) space forms. Remarkably, we 
also verify these inequalities with the known Casorati inequalities for Riemannian maps whose target spaces 
are Sasakian and Kenmotsu space forms.

Now, we give the main result of this subsection.



R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 9

Theorem 9. Let F : (M m1
1 , g1) → (M m2

2 (c1, c2, c3) , ϕ2, ξ2, η2, g2) be a Riemannian map from a Riemannian 
manifold to a generalized {︄Sasakian space form with rank r ≥ 3. Then

ρℋ
δℋC (r − 1) + c1 + 3c2

r(r−1)∥Pℛ∥2 − 2
r c3, if ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗);≤

δℋC (r − 1) + c1 + 3c2
r(r−1)∥Pℛ∥2, if ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗)⊥,

and {︄
δ̂ℋ

ρℋ C (r − 1) + c1 + 3c2
r(r−1)∥Pℛ∥2 − 2

r c3, if ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F
≤ ∗);

δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + c1 + 3c2
r(r−1)∥Pℛ∥2, if ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗)⊥.

The equality cases are the same as the equality cases of Theorem 4.

Proof. Since M2 is a generalized Sasakian space form, using (2), (3), and (10) we obtain,

∑︂r
g M
2(R 2 (F∗Zi, F∗Zj)F∗Zj , F∗Zi)

i,j=1

∑︂r
= c1 {g1 (Zj , Zj) g1 (Zi, Zi) − g1 (Zi, Zj) g1 (Zj , Zi)}

i,j=1

∑︂r {︁ (︁ )︁ (︁ )︁ (︁ (︁ )︁
+ c2 g ℛ

2 F∗Zi, P F∗Zj g2 PℛF∗Zj , F∗Zi − g2 F∗Zj , P
ℛ )︁
F∗Zj g2 PℛF∗Zi, F∗Zi

i,j=1(︁ )︁ (︁
+ 2g ℛ

2 F∗Zi, P F ℛ )︁}︁
∗Zj g2 P F∗Zj , F∑︂ ∗Zi

r

+ c3 {η2 (F∗Zi) η2 (F∗Zj) g2 (F∗Zj , F∗Zi) − η2 (F∗Zj) η2 (F∗Zj) g2 (F∗Zi, F∗Zi)
i,j=1

+g2 (F∗Zi, F∗Zj) η2 (F∗Zj) η2 (F∗Zi) − g2 (F∗Zj , F∗Zj) η2 (F∗Zi) η2 (F∗Zi)} .

Equivalently, {︄
2 scalℛ = r (r − 1) c1 + 3c2∥Pℛ∥2 − 2(r − 1)c3, if ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗);

r (r − 1) c1 + 3c2∥Pℛ∥2, if ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗)⊥.

Hence {︄
c1 + 3c2

ρℛ r(r−1)∥Pℛ∥2 − 2
r c3, if ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F

= ∗);
c1 + 3c2

r(r−1)∥Pℛ∥2, if ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗)⊥.

Then the required inequalities follow using the above equations in (11). □
We have the following straightforward corollary.

Corollary 10. Let F : (M m1
1 , g1) → (M m2

2 (c1, c2, c3) , ϕ2, ξ2, η2, g2) be a Riemannian map.

1. Suppose M2(c) is a Sasakian space form.

(a) If ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗), then {︄
δℋ

ρℋ C (r − 1) + (c+3)
4 + 3(c−1)

4r(r−1)∥Pℛ∥2 − (c−1)
≤ 2r ,

δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + (c+3)
4 + 3(c−1) (

4r(r−1)∥Pℛ∥2 − (c−1) 20)
2r .



10 R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 

(b) If ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗)⊥, then
{︄

δℋ r − 1) + (c+3)
ρℋ C ( 4 + 3(c−1)

≤ 4r(r−1)∥Pℛ∥2,

δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + (c+3) 3(c−1)
4 + 4r(r−1)∥Pℛ∥2.

2. Suppose M2(c) is a Kenmotsu space form.

(a) If ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗), then
{︄

δℋ(r − 1) + (c−3) 3(c+1)
ρℋ ≤ C 4 + 4r(r−1)∥Pℛ∥2 − (c+1)

2r ,

δ̂ℋ ) 3(c+1) c+1)
C (r − 1) + (c−3

4 + 4r(r−1)∥Pℛ∥2 − (
2r .

(b) If ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗)⊥, then
{︄

δℋ(r − 1) + (c−3) 3(c+1) ,
ρℋ ≤ C 4 + 4r(r−1)∥Pℛ∥2

δ̂ℋ (c+1)
C (r − 1) + (c−3)

4 + 3
4r(r−1)∥Pℛ∥2.

3. Suppose M2(c) is a cosymplectic space form.

(a) If ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗), then
{︄

ℋ c 3c ℛ
C (r − 1) +

ρℋ
δ

≤ 4 + 4r(r−1)∥P ∥2 − c 
2r ,

δ̂ℋ  
C (r − 1) + c 3c

4 + 4r(r−1)∥Pℛ∥2 − c 
2r .

(b) If ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F ⊥
∗) , then

{︄
δℋ  
C (r − 1) + c + 3c ∥Pℛ∥2,

ρℋ ≤ 4 4r(r−1)
δ̂ℋ  c 
C (r − 1) + c

4 + 3
4r(r−1)∥Pℛ∥2.

4. Suppose M2(c) is an almost C(α) space form.

(a) If ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗), then
⎧⎨ (︁ )︁ (︁ )︁ (︁ )︁

ℋ( c+ α2 α2
r − 1) + 3

ρℋ ≤ ⎩ δC (︁  )︁ + 3 c−α2

(︁ )︁ ℛ
4 4r(r−1) ∥P ∥2 − c−

(︁ 2r )︁ ,
α2

δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + c+3α2 3 c−α2

4 + 4r(r−1) ∥Pℛ∥2 − c−
2r .

(b) If ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F ⊥
∗) , then

⎧⎨ (︁ )︁ (︁ )︁
ℋ c+3α2 3 c−α2

ρℋ ≤ ⎩ δC (r − 1) + (︁ 4 + 4(︁r(r−1) ∥Pℛ∥2,
c+3α2)︁

δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + 4 + 3 c−α2)︁
4r(r−1) ∥Pℛ∥2.

In addition, the equality cases are the same as the equality cases of the previous theorem.

Remark 11. In [31], it is mentioned that ξ in [30, Theorem 3.1] belongs to Γ(range F∗)⊥. In addition, we 
observe that Eq. (20) is the same as [31, Eq. (0.1)] and [30, Eq. (3.1)], regardless of the notation.



R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 11

Similarly to [15, Definition 3.1], we recall that for an invariant Riemannian map we have ϕ2(range F∗) =
(range F∗) and for an anti-invariant Riemannian map we have ϕ2(range F∗) ⊆ (range F∗)⊥. Taking into 
account this information, one can get the following inequalities similar to Theorem 9.

Proposition 12. Let F : (M m1
1 , g1) → (M m2

2 (c1, c2, c3) , ϕ2, ξ2, η2, g2) be a Riemannian map from a Rie
mannian manifold to a generalized Sasakian space form with rank r ≥ 3.

1. If F is invariant, then
{︄

δℋ
ρℋ C (r − 1) + c1 + 3c2

(r−1) −
2
r c3, if ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗);≤

δℋC (r − 1) + c1 + 3c2
(r−1) , if ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗)⊥,

and
{︄

δ̂ℋ
ρℋ C (r − 1) + c1 + 3c2

(r−1) −
2
r c3, if ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗);≤

δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + c1 + 3c2
(r−1) , if ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗)⊥.

2. If F is anti-invariant, then
{︄

δℋ
ρℋ ≤ C (r − 1) + c1 − 2

r c3, if ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗);
δℋC (r − 1) + c1, if ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗)⊥,

and
{︄

ρℋ ≤ δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + c1 − 2
r c3, if ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗);

δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + c1, if ξ2 ∈ Γ(range F∗)⊥.

The equality cases are the same as the equality cases of Theorem 4.

Remark 13. In particular, if F is an invariant or anti-invariant Riemannian map from a Riemannian manifold 
to a Kenmotsu space form, then by the previous proposition, we observe that the inequalities become the 
same as the inequalities given in [42, Corollaries 5.1 and 5.2].

3. General Casorati inequalities and implications for vertical distributions of Riemannian submersions

This section is divided into three subsections. The first subsection is dedicated to the general form of Ca
sorati inequalities for the vertical distributions of Riemannian submersions between Riemannian manifolds. 
The second and third subsections are dedicated to the implications: Casorati inequalities when the source 
spaces are generalized complex and generalized Sasakian space forms, respectively. Now we start with some 
preliminaries.

The Riemannian map defined in the previous section is called a Riemannian submersion if (range F∗)⊥ =
{0}. Let RM1 and R̂ denote the curvature tensors for M1 and the vertical distribution, respectively. Then 
for Ui ∈ Γ(kerF∗), the Gauss-Codazzi equation for submersion F is given as [10]

(︁ )︁ (︂ )︂
g RM
1 1 (U1, U2)U3, U4 = g2 R̂ (U1, U2)U3, U4 − g1(TU1U4, TU2U3) + g1(TU2U4, TU1U4), (21)

where T is the O’Neill tensor defined in [27].



12 R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 

At a point p ∈ M1, suppose that {U1, . . . , Ur} is an orthonormal basis of the vertical space and 
{Zr+1, . . . , Zm1} is an orthonormal basis of the horizontal space. Then the scalar curvatures are given 
by

∑︂r (︁ )︁ ∑︂r (︂ )︂
2 scal𝒱 1

M = g1 RM (Ui, Uj)Uj , Ui , 2 scal𝒱 = g1 R̂ (Ui, Uj)Uj , U .
1 i

i,j=1 i,j=1

Consequently, we define normalized scalar curvatures as

2 scal𝒱
ρ𝒱 = 2 scal𝒱

, ρ𝒱 = M1

r (r − 1) M .
1 r (r − 1)

Also, we set
α

T𝒱
ij = g1 (TU Uj , Zα) , i, j = 1, . . . , r, α = r + 1, . . . ,m

i 1,

⃦⃦ ⃦⃦ ∑︂r2
T𝒱 = g1 (TU U , TU U ) ,

i j i j
i,j=1

∑︂r
trace T𝒱 = TU U .

i i
i=1 

Then the Casorati curvature of the vertical space is defined as

⃦⃦ m1
2 ∑︂r (︂ )︂

α 2
C𝒱 = 1

T𝒱 ⃦⃦ = 1 ∑︂
T𝒱

r r ij .
α=r+1 i,j=1

Let L𝒱 be a k dimensional subspace (k ≥ 2) of vertical space with orthonormal basis {U1, . . . , Uk}. Then 
its Casorati curvature 𝒱

 CL is given by

𝒱 ∑︂m1 ∑︂k (︂ )︂2
CL = 1 

T𝒱α

k ij .
α=r+1 i,j=1

Moreover, the normalized Casorati curvatures δ𝒱C(r− 1) and δ̂𝒱C(r− 1) associated with the vertical space at 
a point p are given by

[︁ ]︁ r + 1)
δ𝒱 𝒱
C(r − 1) = 1 𝒱  (kerF

p 2Cp + (
2 inf{CL𝒱 |L a hyperplane of ∗p)},
r 

and
[︂ ]︂ 2r − 1) 𝒱
δ̂𝒱C(r − 1) = 2C𝒱

p − ( f (kerF∗p)}.
p 2 sup{CL |L𝒱 a hyperplane o

r 

In the sequel, for any 𝒵 ∈ Γ(TM1), we write

J1𝒵 = ϕ1𝒵 = P𝒱𝒵 + Q𝒱𝒵, (22)

w∑︁here P𝒱𝒵 ∈ Γ(ker F∗)∑︁, Q𝒱𝒵 ∈ Γ(ker F∗)⊥ and P𝒱 is the endomorphism on (ker F∗) such that ∥P𝒱∥2 =
r r

( 2 ∑︁r (︁ )︁
g1(Ui, J1Uj))2 = (g1(Ui, ϕ1Uj)) = g1(Ui, P

𝒱Uj)
2.

i,j=1 i,j=1 i,j=1



R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 13

3.1. General Casorati inequalities for vertical distributions of Riemannian submersions

In this subsection, we give general forms of the Casorati inequalities for the vertical distributions of 
Riemannian submersions as follows.

Theorem 14. Let F : (M m1
1 , g1) → (M m2

2 , g2) be a Riemannian submersion between Riemannian manifolds 
with vertical space of dimension r ≥ 3. Then

ρ𝒱 ≤ δ𝒱 𝒱
C (r − 1) + ρM and ρ𝒱 ≤ δ̂𝒱C (r − 1) + ρ𝒱M . (23)

1 1

Moreover, the equality holds in any of the above two inequalities at a point p ∈ M1 if and only if for suitable 
orthonormal bases, the following hold.

α α α
T𝒱

11 = T𝒱
22 = · · · = T𝒱

r−1 r−1 = 1 𝒱α

2Trr ,

T𝒱α

ij = 0, 1 ≤ i ̸= j ≤ r.

The equality conditions can be interpreted as follows. The first condition gives g1(U1, TU1Zα) = g1(U2, TU2Zα) =
· · · = g1(Ur−1, TU α) = 1

2g1(Ur, TU Z with respect to all horizontal directions (Z
r−1Z r α) α,where α ∈

{r+1, . . . ,m1}). Equivalently, there exist (m1−r) mutually orthogonal horizontal unit vector fields such that 
the shape operator with respect to all directions has an eigenvalue of multiplicity (r − 1) and that for each 
Zα the distinguished eigendirections are the same (namely Ur). Hence, the leaves of vertical space (called 
fibers of F ) are invariantly quasi-umbilical [7]. The second condition gives g1(Uj , TU Z = 0 with respect to 

i α)
all horizontal directions (Zα,where α ∈ {r + 1, . . . ,m1}). Equivalently, the shape operator matrices become 
diagonal, and hence commute.

Proof. At a point p ∈ M1, let {U1, . . . , Ur} and {Zr+1, . . . , Zm1} be orthonormal bases for vertical and 
horizontal space, respectively. Then putting U1 = U4 = Ui and U2 = U3 = Uj in (21), we obtain

⃦⃦
2 scal𝒱M = 2 scal𝒱 − trace T𝒱 ⃦⃦2 + rC𝒱 . (24)

1

Now, consider the quadratic polynomial

𝒫𝒱 𝒱
= 1

2r(
1

r − 1)C𝒱 + 2
2(r − 1)CL + 2 scal𝒱M − 2 scal𝒱 , (25)

1

and assume that the hyperplane L𝒱 is spanned by {U1, . . . , Ur−1}. Then using (24), we obtain

∑︂m1 ∑︂r−1 {︃ (︂ )︂ (︂ )︂ }︃
2

𝒫𝒱 = r T𝒱α 2
ii + (r + 1) T𝒱α

ir
α=r+1 i=1 

∑︂ ⎧
m1 ⎨ ∑︂r−1 (︂ )︂ )︂ ⎫

α 2 ∑︂r
+ ⎩2 (r + 1) T𝒱 𝒱α 1) (︂ 2⎬

ij − α
2 T𝒱

ii Tjj + (r −
2 T𝒱α

 rr ⎭ .
α=r+1 1=i<j 1=i<j

Thus,

∑︂ ⎛ ⎞
m1

𝒫𝒱 ≥ ⎝ ∑︂r−1 (︂ )︂2 1) (︂ )︂2 ∑︂r α
r T𝒱α ⎠

ii + (r −
2 T𝒱α

T𝒱α
.

 rr − 2 ii T𝒱
jj

α=r+1 i=1 1=i<j



14 R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 

Let f : Rr → R be a quadratic form for each r + 1 ≤ α ≤ m1 such that

∑︂r−1 (︂ )︂ )︂
α 2

( 𝒱α 𝒱 (r − 1) (︂ ∑︂
f T𝒱α 𝒱α 2 r

𝒱α

11 , . . . , Trr ) = r Tii + 2 T T𝒱α

 rr − 2 Tii jj ,
i=1 1=i<j

and constrained extremum problem min f subject to T𝒱α 𝒱α

11 + · · · + Trr = kα ∈ R. Then using Lemma 3, we 
get the global minimum critical point,

α
α α 2kα

T𝒱
11 = · · · α

= T𝒱
r−1 r−1 = k

r + 1 , T𝒱
rr = .

r + 1

Moreover, f(T𝒱α 𝒱α

11 , . . . , Trr ) = 0. Consequently, we obtain

𝒫𝒱 ≥ 0. (26)

Then (25) and (26) yield,

𝒱
ρ𝒱 ≤ 1 𝒱

2C + (r + 1)
2 CL + ρ𝒱
r M . (27)

1

In a similar manner, considering the quadratic polynomial

𝒬𝒱 𝒱
= 2r (r − 1)C𝒱 − 1

2 (r − 1) (2r − 1)CL + 2 scal𝒱M − 2 scal𝒱 ,
1

we obtain

𝒬𝒱 ≥ 0, (28)

and

ρ𝒱 ≤ 2C𝒱 − (2r − 1) L𝒱 𝒱
2 C + ρ
r M . (29)

1

Then (23) follows by taking the infimum in (27) and the supremum in (29) on all hyperplanes L𝒱 . In 
addition, the equality cases are true by (26) and (28). □
3.2. Implications for the vertical distributions of Riemannian submersions from generalized complex space 
forms

In this subsection, we obtain Casorati inequalities for the vertical distributions of Riemannian submer
sions whose source spaces are generalized complex space forms (M m1

1 (c1, c2) , g1, J1) using the general 
inequalities obtained in Subsection 3.1. As corollaries of this subsection, we also obtain Casorati inequalities 
for Riemannian submersions whose source spaces are real, complex, and real Kähler space forms. Remark
ably, we also verify these inequalities with the known Casorati inequalities for Riemannian submersions 
whose source spaces are real and complex space forms.

Now, we give the main result of this subsection.

Theorem 15. Let F : (M m1
1 (c1, c2) , g1, J1) → (M m2

2 , g2) be a Riemannian submersion from a generalized 
complex space form onto a Riemannian manifold with vertical space of dimension r ≥ 3. Then



R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 15

ρ𝒱 ≤ δ𝒱C (r − 1) + c 𝒱
1 + 3c2 (r − 1) + c 𝒱

1 + 3c2
r (r − 1)∥P ∥2 and ρ𝒱 ≤ δ̂𝒱C r (r − 1)∥P ∥2.

The equality cases are the same as the equality cases of Theorem 14.

Proof. Since M1 is a generalized complex space form, using (1) and (22) we obtain,

∑︂r ∑︂r
g RM
1( 1(Ui, Uj)Uj , Ui) = c1{g1(Uj , Uj)g1(Ui, Ui) − g1(Ui, Uj)g1(Uj , Ui)}

i,j=1 i,j=1

∑︂r {︁ (︁ )︁ (︁ )︁ (︁ )︁}︁
+ c 𝒱 (︁ 𝒱 )︁ (︁ )︁ (︁ )︁

2 g1 Ui, P Uj g1 P Uj , Ui − g1 U ,P𝒱
j Uj g 𝒱

1 P Ui, Ui + 2g 𝒱
1 Ui, P U g 𝒱

j 1 P Uj , Ui .
i,j=1

Equivalently,

2 scal𝒱M = r (r − 1) c
1 1 + 3c2∥P𝒱∥2.

Hence
3c2

ρ𝒱M = c P𝒱∥2.
1 1 +

r (r − 1)∥

Then the required inequalities follow using the above equation in (23). □
We have the following straightforward corollary.

Corollary 16. Let F : (M m1
1 (c1, c2) , g1) → (M m2

2 , g2) be a Riemannian submersion.

1. If M1(c) is a real space form, then

ρ𝒱 ≤ δ𝒱C(r − 1) + c and ρ𝒱 ≤ δ̂𝒱C(r − 1) + c. (30)

2. If M1(c) is a complex space form, then

ρ𝒱 ≤  
δ𝒱C(r − 1) + c 3c

4 + 4 ∥P𝒱∥2 and ρ𝒱 ≤ δ̂𝒱
r (r − 1) C(r − 1) + c 

4 + 3c 
4 . (31)
r (r − 1)∥P

𝒱∥2

3. If M1(c) is a real Kähler space form, then

α) − α) c + 3α) 3 (c− α)
ρ𝒱 ≤ δ𝒱 𝒱

C(r − 1) + (c + 3
4 + 3 (c
 4r (r − 1)∥P ∥2 and ρ𝒱 ≤ δ̂𝒱C(r − 1) + (

4 + ∥2.
 4r (r − 1)∥P

𝒱

In addition, the equality cases are the same as the equality cases of the previous theorem.

Remark 17. We observe that Eqs. (30) and (31) are the same as [17, Eq. (5.3)] and [17, Eqs. (5.9) and (5.10)], 
respectively.

From [33,34], we recall that for an invariant Riemannian submersion we have J1(ker F∗) = (ker F∗) and 
for an anti-invariant Riemannian submersion we have J ⊥

1(ker F∗) ⊆ (ker F∗) . Taking into account this 
information, one can get the following inequalities similar to Theorem 15.

Proposition 18. Let F : (M m1
1 (c1, c2) , g1, J1) → (M m2

2 , g2) be a Riemannian submersion from a generalized 
complex space form onto a Riemannian manifold with vertical space of dimension r ≥ 3.



16 R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 

1. If F is invariant, then

3c2
ρ𝒱 ≤ δ𝒱C(r − 1) + c1 + ( ≤ δ̂𝒱

r − 1) and ρ𝒱 C(r − 1) + c1 + 3c2
(r − 1) .

2. If F is anti-invariant, then

ρ𝒱 ≤ δ𝒱C(r − 1) + c1 and ρ𝒱 ≤ δ̂𝒱C(r − 1) + c1.

The equality cases are the same as the equality cases of Theorem 14.

Remark 19. In particular, if F is an anti-invariant Riemannian submersion from a complex space form to a 
Riemannian manifold, then by the previous proposition we observe that the inequalities become the same 
as the inequalities given in [17, Eq. (5.11)].

3.3. Implications for the vertical distributions of Riemannian submersions from generalized Sasakian space 
forms

In this subsection, we obtain Casorati inequalities for the vertical distributions of Riemannian submer
sions whose source spaces are generalized Sasakian space forms (M m1

1 (c1, c2, c3) , ϕ1, ξ1, η1, g1) using the 
general inequalities obtained in Subsection 3.1. As corollaries of this subsection, we also obtain Casorati 
inequalities for Riemannian submersions whose source spaces are Sasakian, Kenmotsu, cosymplectic, and 
almost C(α) space forms. Remarkably, we also verify these inequalities with the known Casorati inequalities 
for Riemannian submersions whose source spaces are Sasakian space forms.

Now, we give the main result of this subsection.

Theorem 20. Let F : (M m1 (c1, c ) , ϕ η m
1 2, c3 1, ξ1, 1, g1) → (M 2

2 , g2) be a Riemannian submersion from a 
generalized Sasakian space form onto a Riemannian manifold with vertical space of dimension r ≥ 3. Then

{︄
δ𝒱 (r − 1) + c 𝒱

1 + 3c2
ρ𝒱 C r(r−1)∥P ∥2 − 2

r c3, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F ;
≤ ∗)

δ𝒱 𝒱
C(r − 1) + c1 + 3c2

r(r−1)∥P ∥2, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗)⊥,

and {︄
δ̂𝒱 1) + c 3c

1 + 2 Γ(ker F∗);
ρ𝒱 ≤ C(r − r(r−1)∥P𝒱∥2 − 2

r c3, if ξ1 ∈
δ̂𝒱C(r − 1) + c 3c

1 + 2
r(r−1)∥P𝒱∥2, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗)⊥.

The equality cases are the same as the equality cases of Theorem 14.

Proof. Since M1 is a generalized Sasakian space form, using (2) and (22) we obtain,

∑︂r ∑︂r
g M
1(R 1 (Ui, Uj)Uj , Ui) = c1 {g1 (Uj , Uj) g1 (Ui, Ui) − g1 (Ui, Uj) g1 (Uj , Ui)}

i,j=1 i,j=1

∑︂r {︁ (︁ )︁ (︁ )︁ (︁
+ c 𝒱 P U 𝒱 )︁ (︁ 𝒱 )︁ (︁ (︁ }︁

2 g1 Ui, P U g 𝒱
j 1 j , Ui − g1 Uj , P Uj g1 P Ui, Ui + 2g 𝒱 )︁

1 Ui, P Uj g 𝒱 )︁
1 P Uj , Ui

i,j=1

∑︂r
+ c3 {η1 (Ui) η1 (Uj) g1 (Uj , Ui) − η1 (Uj) η1 (Uj) g1 (Ui, Ui)

i,j=1

+g1 (Ui, Uj) η1 (Uj) η1 (Ui) − g1 (Uj , Uj) η1 (Ui) η1 (Ui)} .



R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 17

Equivalently,
{︄

2 scal𝒱M = r (r − 1) c1 + 3c2∥P𝒱∥2 − 2(r − 1)c3, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗);
1 r (r − 1) c1 + 3c2∥P𝒱∥2, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗)⊥.

Hence
{︄

c + 3c2 𝒱 2 − 2
ρ𝒱 r c3, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗);
M = 1 r(r−1)∥P ∥

1 c1 + 3c2
r(r−1)∥P𝒱∥2, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗)⊥.

Then the required inequalities follow using the above equations in (23). □
We have the following straightforward corollary.

Corollary 21. Let F : (M m1
1 (c1, c m

2, c3) , ϕ1, ξ1, η1, g1) → (M 2
2 , g2) be a Riemannian submersion.

1. Suppose M1(c) is a Sasakian space form.

(a) If ξ1 ∈ Γ(kerF∗), then
{︄

δ𝒱
ρ𝒱 C(r − 1) + (c+3)

4 + 3(c−1)
4r(r−1)∥P𝒱∥2 − (c−1)

≤ 2r ,

δ̂𝒱C(r − 1) + (c+3)
4 + 3(c−1)

4r(r−1)∥P𝒱∥2 − (c−1)
2r .

(b) If ξ1 ∈ Γ(kerF∗)⊥, then
{︄

δ𝒱
ρ𝒱 C(r − 1) + (c+3)

4 + 3(c−1)
≤ 4r(r−1)∥P𝒱∥2,

(
δ̂𝒱C(r − 1) + (c+3)

4 + 3(c−1)
4r(r−1)∥P𝒱∥2 32)

.

2. Suppose M1(c) is a Kenmotsu space form.

(a) If ξ1 ∈ Γ(kerF∗), then
{︄

δ𝒱
ρ𝒱 C(r − 1) + (c−3)

4 + 3(c+1)
4r(r−1)∥P𝒱∥2 − (c+1)

≤ 2r ,

δ̂𝒱C(r − 1) + (c−3)
4 + 3(c+1)

4r(r−1)∥P𝒱∥2 − (c+1)
2r .

(b) If ξ1 ∈ Γ(kerF∗)⊥, then
{︄

δ𝒱
ρ𝒱 C(r − 1) + (c−3)

≤ 4 + 3(c+1)
4r(r−1)∥P𝒱∥2,

δ̂𝒱C(r − 1) + (c−3)
4 + 3(c+1)

4r(r−1)∥P𝒱∥2.

3. Suppose M1(c) is a cosymplectic space form.

(a) If ξ1 ∈ Γ(kerF∗), then
{︄

δ𝒱C(r − 1) + c 
ρ𝒱 4 + 3c 

≤ 4r(r−1)∥P𝒱∥2 − c 
2r ,

δ̂𝒱C(r − 1) + c 
4 + 3c 

4r(r−1)∥P𝒱∥2 − c 
2r .



18 R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 

(b) If ξ1 ∈ Γ(kerF∗)⊥, then
{︄

δ𝒱 c 
𝒱 C(r − 1) + c 

ρ 4 + 3
4r(r−1)∥P𝒱∥2,

≤
δ̂𝒱C(r − 1) + c 

4 + 3c 
4r(r−1)∥P𝒱∥2.

4. Suppose M1(c) is an almost C(α) space form.

(a) If ξ1 ∈ Γ(kerF∗), then ⎧⎨ (︁ (︁
c+3α2)︁

( − 1) + (︁ + 3 c−α2)︁ (︁ )︁
∥ c−α2
P𝒱∥2 −

ρ𝒱 ≤ ⎩ δ𝒱C r 4 4r(r−1) (︁ 2r )︁ ,2)︁ (︁
−α2)︁

δ̂𝒱C(r − 1) + c+3α
4 + 3 c

4r(r−1) ∥P𝒱∥2 − c−α2

2r .

(b) If ξ1 ∈ Γ(kerF ⊥
∗) , then

⎧⎨ (︁ )︁ (︁ )︁
𝒱 ) + c+3α2 3 c−α2

(︁ (︁ 𝒱
ρ𝒱 ≤ ⎩ δC(r − 1 4 + 4r(r−1) ∥P ∥2,

c−α2)︁
δ̂𝒱C(r − 1) + c+3α2)︁

4 + 3
4r(r−1) ∥P𝒱∥2.

In addition, the equality cases are the same as the equality cases of the previous theorem.

Remark 22. In [31], it is mentioned that ξ in [30, Theorem 4.2] belongs to Γ(ker F∗)⊥. In addition, we 
observe that Eq. (32) becomes the same as [31, Eq. (0.3)] and [30, Eq. (4.9)], if we take the same notation 
and (r + 1)-dimensional vertical space instead r.

Similarly to [8,16], we recall that for invariant Riemannian submersions, we have ϕ1(ker F∗) = (ker F∗)
and for anti-invariant Riemannian submersions we have ϕ1(ker F∗) ⊆ (ker F ⊥

∗) . Taking into account this 
information, one can get the following inequalities similar to Theorem 20.

Proposition 23. Let F : (M m1
1 (c1, c2, c3) , ϕ1, ξ1, η1, g

m2
1) → (M2 , g2) be a Riemannian submersion from a 

generalized Sasakian space form onto a Riemannian manifold with vertical space of dimension r ≥ 3.

1. If F is invariant, then
{︄

δ𝒱 r − 1) + c 3c
1 + 2 − 2

ρ𝒱 ≤ C( (r−1) r c3, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗);
δ𝒱C(r − 1) + c1 + 3c2

(r−1) , if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F ⊥
∗) ,

and {︄
δ̂𝒱 2

ρ𝒱 ≤ C(r − 1) + c1 + 3c2
(r−1) − r c3, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗);

δ̂𝒱C(r − 1) + c 3c
1 + 2

(r−1) , if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗)⊥.

2. If F is anti-invariant, then
{︄

δ𝒱 , if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗);
ρ𝒱 ≤ C(r − 1) + c 2

1 − r c3
δ𝒱 ⊥
C(r − 1) + c1, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗) ,

and {︄
𝒱

ρ𝒱 ≤ δ̂C(r − 1) + c1 − 2
r c3, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗);

δ̂𝒱C(r − 1) + c1, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗)⊥.



R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 19

The equality cases are the same as the equality cases of Theorem 14.

4. General Casorati inequalities and implications for horizontal distributions of Riemannian submersions

This section is divided into three subsections. The first subsection is dedicated to the general form 
of Casorati inequalities for the horizontal distributions of Riemannian submersions between Riemannian 
manifolds. The second and third subsections are dedicated to the implications: Casorati inequalities when 
the source spaces are generalized complex and generalized Sasakian space forms, respectively. Now we start 
with some preliminaries.

Let F : (Mm1
1 , g1) → (Mm2

2 , g2) be a Riemannian submersion between two Riemannian manifolds. Let 
RM1 and Rℋ denote the curvature tensors for M1 and the horizontal distribution, respectively. Then for 
Zi ∈ Γ(kerF∗)⊥, the Gauss-Codazzi equation for submersion F is given as [10]

RM1 (Z1, Z2, Z3, Z4) = Rℋ (Z1, Z2, Z3, Z4) + 2g1 (AZ1Z2, AZ3Z4)
−g1 (AZ2Z3, AZ1Z4) + g1 (AZ1Z3, AZ2Z4) (33)

where A is the O’Neill tensor defined in [27].
At a point p ∈ M1, suppose that {Zi}ri=1 is an orthonormal basis of the horizontal space and {Ui}m1

i=r+1
is∑︁ an orthonormal basis of the vertical space. Then the scalar curvatures are given by (6) and 2 scalℋℋ =

r (︁ )︁
g1 Rℋ (Zi, Zj)Zj , Zi . Consequently, we define normalized scalar curvatures as in (7) and ρℋℋ = 2 scalℋℋ

r(r−1) . 
i,j=1
Also, we set

Aℋα

ij = g1 (AZ Zj , Uα) , i, j = 1, . . . , r, α = r + 1, . . . ,m1,

⃦⃦ ∑︂ i

Aℋ⃦⃦ r
2 = g1 (AZ Z A

i j , Z Z )
i j ,

i,j=1

∑︂r
trace Aℋ = AZ Z

i i.
i=1 

Then the Casorati curvature of the horizontal space is defined as

Cℋ = 1 ⃦⃦ m ∑︂
Aℋ⃦⃦2 = 1 ∑︂1 r (︂ )︂

α
Aℋ 2

r ij .
r

α=r+1 i,j=1

Let Lℋ be a k dimensional subspace (k ≥ 2) of horizontal space with orthonormal basis {Z1, . . . , Zk}. 
Then its Casorati curvature CLℋ is given by

∑︂m1 ∑︂k (︂ )︂
CLℋ

= 1 ℋα 2
A

k ij .
α=r+1 i,j=1

Moreover, the normalized Casorati curvatures δℋC (r− 1) and δ̂ℋC (r− 1) associated with the horizontal space 
at a point p are given by (8) and (9).

In the sequel, for any 𝒵 ∈ Γ(TM1), we write

J1𝒵 = ϕ1𝒵 = Pℋ𝒵 + Qℋ𝒵, (34)

w∑︁here Pℋ𝒵 ∈ Γ(kerF∗)⊥, Qℋ𝒵 ∈ Γ(kerF∗) and Pℋ is the endomorphism on (kerF∗)⊥ such that ∥Pℋ∥2 =
r ∑︁

(g1(Zi, J1Zj))2
∑︁r r (︁ )︁

= (g1( , ϕ1Zj))2 = g1(
2

Z Zi, P
ℋ

i Zj) .
i,j=1 i,j=1 i,j=1



20 R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 

4.1. General Casorati inequalities for horizontal distributions of Riemannian submersions

In this subsection, we give general forms of the Casorati inequalities for the horizontal distributions of 
Riemannian submersions as follows.

Theorem 24. Let F : (Mm1 2
1 , g1) → (Mm

2 , g2) be a Riemannian submersion between Riemannian manifolds 
with horizontal space of dimension r ≥ 3. Then

ρℋ ℋ
ℋ ≤ δℋC (r − 1) + ρ and ρℋℋ ≤ δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + ρℋ. (35)

Moreover, equality holds in any of the above two inequalities at a point p ∈ M1 if and only if the tensor A
vanishes. Geometrically, equality means that the horizontal distribution is integrable.

Proof. At a point p ∈ M1, let {Z1, . . . , Zr} and {Ur+1, . . . , Um1} be orthonormal bases for horizontal and 
vertical space, respectively. Then putting Z1 = Z4 = Zi and Z2 = Z3 = Zj in (33), we obtain

⃦⃦
2 scalℋ = 2 scalℋℋ + 3rCℋ ⃦⃦

− trace 2
Aℋ . (36)

Now, consider the quadratic polynomial

𝒫ℋ = 1
2r(r − 1)Cℋ + 1

2(r2 − 1)CLℋ
+ 2 scalℋ − 2 scalℋℋ, (37)

and assume that the hyperplane Lℋ is spanned by {Z1, . . . , Zr−1}. Then using (36), we obtain

∑︂ ⎧
m1 ⎨ ∑︂r−1 (︂ )︂2 (︂ )︂2 ∑︂ (︂ )︂2

𝒫ℋ = ⎩ α α
( 1
r + 3) Aℋ

ii + 2(r + 5) Aℋ ℋα

rr + 2(r + 3) Aij
α=r+1 i,j=1 ⎫ 1≤i<j≤r−1

∑︂r−1 (︂ )︂ ∑︂r ⎬
+(r + 5) Aℋα 2 ℋα α

ir − Aii Aℋ
jj ⎭

i=1 i,j=1

Thus,

∑︂ ⎧
m1 ⎨ ∑︂r−1 (︂ )︂ (︂ )︂ ∑︂ ⎫⎬

𝒫ℋ ≥ ⎩(r + 3) Aℋα 2 ℋα 2 r
α ℋα

ii + 1
2(r + 5) Arr − Aℋ

ii Ajj ⎭ .
α=r+1 i,j=1 i,j=1

Since α
 AXY = −AY X, Aℋ

ii = 0. Hence,

𝒫ℋ ≥ 0. (38)

Then (37) and (38) yield,

ρℋℋ ≤ 1 ℋ + 1) ℋ

2𝒞 + (r
2 𝒞L + ρℋ. (39)
r 

In a similar manner, considering the quadratic polynomial

𝒬ℋ ℋ
= 2r (r − 1)Cℋ − 1

2 (r − 1) (2r − 1)CL + 2 scalℋ − 2 scalℋℋ,

we obtain



R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 21

𝒬ℋ ≥ 0, (40)

and
r − 1)

ρℋ ℋ Lℋ
ℋ ≤ 2C − (2

2 C + ρℋ. (41)
r 

Then (35) follows by taking the infimum in (39) and the supremum in (41) on all hyperplanes Lℋ. In 
addition, the equality cases are true by (38) and (40). □
4.2. Implications for the horizontal distributions of Riemannian submersions from generalized complex 
space forms

In this subsection, we obtain Casorati inequalities for the horizontal distributions of Riemannian sub
mersions whose source spaces are generalized complex space forms (Mm1

1 (c1, c2) , g1, J1) using the general 
inequalities obtained in Subsection 4.1. As corollaries of this subsection, we also obtain Casorati inequalities 
for Riemannian submersions whose source spaces are real, complex, and real Kähler space forms.

Now, we give the main result of this subsection.

Theorem 25. Let F : (Mm1
1 (c1, c2) , g1, J1) → (Mm2

2 , g2) be a Riemannian submersion from a generalized 
complex space form onto a Riemannian manifold with horizontal space of dimension r ≥ 3. Then

ρℋℋ ≤ δℋC (r − 1) + c1 + 3c2 ℋ nd 3c2
ρℋ 1 + .

r (r − 1)∥P ∥2 a ℋ ≤ δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + c
r (r − 1)∥P

ℋ∥2

The equality cases are the same as the equality cases of Theorem 24.

Proof. Since M1 is a generalized complex space form, using (1) and (34) we obtain,

∑︂r ∑︂r
g (RM
1 1(Zi, Zj)Zj , Zi) = c1{g1(Zj , Zj)g1(Zi, Zi) − g1(Zi, Zj)g1(Zj , Zi)}

i,j=1 i,j=1

∑︂r {︁ (︁ )︁ (︁ )︁ (︁ )︁ (︁ )︁ (︁ )︁ )︁}︁
+ c2 g Pℋ

1 Zi, Z g ℋ
j 1 P Zj , Zi − g1 Zj , P

ℋZ ℋ
j g1 P Zi, Zi + 2g1 Z ℋ (︁

i, P Zj g1 PℋZj , Zi .
i,j=1

Equivalently,

2 scalℋ = r (r − 1) c1 + 3c2∥Pℋ∥2.

Hence

ρℋ = 3c2
c1 + ∥2.

r (r − 1)∥P
ℋ

Then the required inequalities follow using the above equation in (35). □
We have the following straightforward corollary.

Corollary 26. Let F : (M m1
1 (c1, c2) , g1) → (M m2

2 , g2) be a Riemannian submersion.

1. If M1(c) is a real space form, then

ρℋℋ ≤ δℋC (r − 1) + c and ρℋℋ ≤ δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + c.



22 R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 

2. If M1(c) is a complex space form, then

ρℋℋ ≤ δℋC (r − 1) + c 
4 + 3c 

4r (r − 1)∥P
ℋ∥2 and ρℋℋ ≤ δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + c 

4 + 3c 
4r (r − 1)∥P

ℋ∥2.

3. If M1(c) is a real Kähler space form, then

ρℋℋ ≤ δℋC (r − 1) + (c + 3α)
4 + 3 (c− α)

4r (r − 1)∥P
ℋ∥2 and ρℋℋ ≤ δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + (c + 3α)

 4 + 3 (c− α)
4r (r − 1)∥P

ℋ∥2.
 

In addition, the equality cases are the same as the equality cases of the previous theorem.

4.3. Implications for the horizontal distributions of Riemannian submersions from generalized Sasakian 
space forms

In this subsection, we obtain Casorati inequalities for the horizontal distributions of Riemannian sub
mersions whose source spaces are generalized Sasakian space forms (M m1

1 (c1, c2, c3) , ϕ1, ξ1, η1, g1) using 
the general inequalities obtained in Subsection 4.1. As corollaries of this subsection, we also obtain Casorati 
inequalities for Riemannian submersions whose source spaces are Sasakian, Kenmotsu, cosymplectic, and 
almost C(α) space forms.

Now, we give the main result of this subsection.

Theorem 27. Let F : (M m1
1 (c1, c m

2, c3) , ϕ1, ξ1, η1, g1) → (M 2
2 , g2) be a Riemannian submersion from a 

generalized Sasakian space form onto a Riemannian manifold with horizontal space of dimension r ≥ 3. 
Then

{︄
δℋ

ρℋ C (r − 1) + c1 + 3c2
r(r−1)∥Pℋ∥2 − 2

r c3, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗)⊥;
ℋ ≤

δℋC (r − 1) + c1 + 3c2
r(r−1)∥Pℋ∥2, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗),

and
{︄

δ̂ℋ
ρℋ C (r − 1) + c1 + 3c2

r(r−1)∥Pℋ∥2 − 2
r c3, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗)⊥;

ℋ ≤
δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + c1 + 3c2

r(r−1)∥Pℋ∥2, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗).

The equality cases are the same as the equality cases of Theorem 24.

Proof. Since M1 is a generalized Sasakian space form, using (2) and (34) we obtain,

∑︂r ∑︂r
g M
1(R 1 (Zi, Zj)Zj , Zi) = c1 {g1 (Zj , Zj) g1 (Zi, Zi) − g1 (Zi, Zj) g1 (Zj , Zi)}

i,j=1 i,j=1

∑︂r {︁ (︁ )︁ (︁ )︁ )︁
+ c2 g1 Zi, P

ℋZ ℋ (︁
j g1 P Zj , Zi − g1 Zj , P

ℋ )︁ (︁ )︁ (︁
Zj g1 PℋZi, Zi + 2g ℋ (︁

1 Zi, P Z ℋ )︁}︁
j g1 P Zj , Zi

i,j=1

∑︂r
+ c3 {η1 (Zi) η1 (Zj) g1 (Zj , Zi) − η1 (Zj) η1 (Zj) g1 (Zi, Zi)

i,j=1

+g1 (Zi, Zj) η1 (Zj) η1 (Zi) − g1 (Zj , Zj) η1 (Zi) η1 (Zi)} .

Equivalently,



R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 23

{︄
2 scalℋ = r (r − 1) c1 + 3c2∥Pℋ∥2 − 2(r − 1)c3, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗)⊥;

r (r − 1) c1 + 3c2∥Pℋ∥2, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗).

Hence {︄
c1 + 3c2

ρℋ = r(r−1)∥Pℋ∥2 − 2
r c3, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗)⊥;

c1 + 3c2
r(r−1)∥Pℋ∥2, if ξ1 ∈ Γ(ker F∗).

Then the required inequalities follow using the above equations in (35). □
We have the following straightforward corollary.

Corollary 28. Let F : (M m1
1 (c1, c m

2, c3) , ϕ1, ξ1, η1, g1) → (M 2
2 , g2) be a Riemannian submersion.

1. Suppose M1(c) is a Sasakian space form.

(a) If ξ1 ∈ Γ(kerF∗)⊥, then
{︄

δℋ
ρℋ C (r − 1) + (c+3)

4 + 3(c−1)

ℋ ≤ 4r(r−1)∥Pℋ∥2 − (c−1)
2r ,

δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + (c+3)
4 + 3(c−1)

4r(r−1)∥Pℋ∥2 − (c−1)
2r .

(b) If ξ1 ∈ Γ(kerF∗), then
{︄

δℋ
ρℋ C (r − 1) + (c+3)

4 + 3(c−1)

ℋ ≤ 4r(r−1)∥Pℋ∥2,

δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + (c+3)
4 + 3(c−1)

4r(r−1)∥Pℋ∥2.

2. Suppose M1(c) is a Kenmotsu space form.

(a) If ξ1 ∈ Γ(kerF∗)⊥, then
{︄

δℋ
ρℋ C (r − 1) + (c−3)

4 + 3(c+1)
4r(r−1)∥Pℋ∥2 − (c+1)

ℋ ≤ 2r ,

δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + (c−3)
4 + 3(c+1)

4r(r−1)∥Pℋ∥2 − (c+1)
2r .

(b) If ξ1 ∈ Γ(kerF∗), then
{︄

δℋ
ρℋ C (r − 1) + (c−3)

4 + 3(c+1)
4r(r−1)∥Pℋ∥2,

ℋ ≤
δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + (c−3)

4 + 3(c+1)
4r(r−1)∥Pℋ∥2.

3. Suppose M1(c) is a cosymplectic space form.

(a) If ξ1 ∈ Γ(kerF∗)⊥, then
{︄

δℋ
ρℋ C (r − 1) + c 

4 + 3c 
4r(r−1)∥Pℋ∥2 − c 

ℋ ≤ 2r ,
δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + c 

4 + 3c 
4r(r−1)∥Pℋ∥2 − c 

2r .

(b) If ξ1 ∈ Γ(kerF∗), then {︄
δℋC (r − 1) + c 

ρℋ 4 + 3c 
4r(r−1)∥Pℋ∥2,

ℋ ≤
δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + c 

4 + 3c 
4r(r−1)∥Pℋ∥2.



24 R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 

4. Suppose M1(c) is an almost C(α) space form.

(a) If ξ1 ∈ Γ(kerF∗)⊥, then
⎧⎨ (︁ (︁ )︁ (︁

( c+ α2)︁ 3 c−α2
r − 1) + 3 ℋ c−α2)︁

ρℋ (︁ 4 )︁ + 4
ℋ ≤ ⎩ δℋC (︁r(r−1))︁∥P ∥2 − (︁ 2r )︁ ,

( 3α2 c−α2 α2
δ̂ℋC r − 1) + c+ ℋ 2

4 + 3
4r(r−1) ∥P ∥ − c−

2r .

(b) If ξ1 ∈ Γ(kerF∗), then ⎧⎨ (︁ )︁ (︁ )︁
ℋ( +3α2 3 c−α2

r − 1) + c

ρℋ (︁ (︁ ℋ
4 + 4r(r−1) ∥P ∥2,

ℋ ≤ ⎩ δC
3α2)︁ c−α2)︁

δ̂ℋC (r − 1) + c+
4 + 3

4r(r−1) ∥Pℋ∥2.

In addition, the equality cases are the same as the equality cases of the previous theorem.

5. Examples

In this section, we provide explicit examples illustrating the general inequalities.
We start with the following example of a Riemannian map for which the inequalities derived in Theorem 4

hold strictly.
(︃ ∑︁4 )︃ (︄ ∑︁ )︄

4 
Example 29. Let M1 = R4, g1 = (dx 2

i) + x1(dx1)(dx2) and M2 = R4, g2 = (dyj)2+ y1(dy1)(dy2) 
i=1 j=1

be two Riemannian manifolds with x1, y1 ∈ (−1, 1). Define a map F : (M1, g1) → (M2, g2) such that

F (x1, x2, x3, x4) = (x1, 0, x3, x4) .

Then we get
{︃ }︃

(ker ∂
F

{︃∗
) = span U1 = ,

∂x2 }︃
(kerF∗)⊥ = span Z

{︃ 1 = ∂
, Z2 = ∂

, Z3 = ∂
,

∂x1 ∂x3 ∂x4 }︃
(range F∗) = span F∗(Z1) = ∂

, F∗(Z2) = ∂
, F∗(Z3) = ∂

,
∂y1 ∂y3 ∂y4

and {︃ }︃
(range F∗)⊥ = span V1 = ∂

,
∂y2

{︂ }︂4 {︂ }︂4
where ∂

∂x and ∂
i ∂y are bases of TpM1 and TF (p)M2, respectively. For all i, j ∈ {1, 2, 3}, we verify 

i=1 j j=1
that

g1(Zi, Zj) = g2(F∗Zi, F∗Zj).

Therefore, F is a Riemannian map with rank 3. The only non-zero Christoffel symbols for g1 are Γx1
x1,x =

1
x1 x2 −1 Γy1

x2
1−1 ,Γx , and for g

1,x =
1 x2 2 are 

1−1 y = y1 ,Γy2 ing all 
1,y1 y2

1−1 y = −1 
1,y1 y2

1−1 . Then by some computations us
Christoffel symbols, Eq. (4) and the fact that y1 = x1, we obtain



R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 25

(∇ 1 ∂
F∗)(Z1, Z1) = −

, (∇F∗)(Z2, Z2) = 0, (∇F∗)(Z3, Z3) = 0,
y2
1 − 1 ∂y2

(∇F∗)(Zi, Zj) = 0 for all i ̸= j ∈ {1, 2, 3}.

Hence, for Vα = V1, we have

Bℋα

11 = g2 ((∇F∗)(Z1, Z1), Vα) = −1 
y2
1 − 1 .

Moreover, in this case, we have
α α

Bℋα

11 ̸= Bℋ
22 = 0 = Bℋ

33 ,
α

Bℋ
ij = 0, 1 ≤ i ̸= j ≤ 3.

Clearly, for F the inequalities obtained in Theorem 4 do not achieve equality.

Now, we give another example of a Riemannian map for which the inequalities derived in Theorem 4
hold with equality.

(︃ ∑︁ (︄ )︄
4 )︃

Example 30. Define F : 4 ∑︁4 
M1 = R , g1 = (dx )2i → M R4

2 = , g2 = (dy )2j such that
i=1 j=1

(︃√︂ )︃
F (x1, x2, x3, x4) = x2

1 + x2
2, x3, x4, 0 .

Then we get
{︄ }︄

(kerF∗) = span U1 = √︁ x2 ∂ − √︁ x1 ∂
,

{︄ x2 2
1 + x2 ∂x1 x2

1 + x2
2 ∂x2 }︄

(kerF ⊥
∗) = span Z1 = √︁ x1 ∂ + √︁ x2 ∂

, Z2 = ∂
, Z3 = ∂

,

{︃ x2 2
1 + x2}︃∂x1 x2

1 + x2
2 ∂x2 ∂x3 ∂x4

3 {︃ }︃
(range F∗) = span F∗(Zj) = ∂

, and (range F∗)⊥ = span V1 = ∂
,

∂yj j=1 ∂y4

{︂ }︂4 {︂ }︂4
where ∂

∂x and ∂ ases of TpM1 and TF (p)M2, respectively. One can verify that F is a 
i ∂y are b

i=1 j j=1
Riemannian map between Riemannian manifolds with rank 3. Further, similar to the previous example, for 
Vα = V1, we have

α
Bℋ

ij = g2 ((∇F∗)(Zi, Zj), Vα) = 0, 1 ≤ i, j ≤ 3.

Clearly, for F the inequalities obtained in Theorem 4 achieve equality.

Now, we give an example of a Riemannian submersion for which the inequalities derived in Theorem 14
and Theorem 24 hold strictly and with equality, respectively.

E∑︁xample 31. Let (M1 = {(x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6) ∈ R6 : x1 ̸= 0, x2 ̸= 0∑︁, x3 ̸= 0, x4 ̸= 0, x5 ̸= 0, x6 ̸= 0}, g1 =
6 3 

dx2
i ) and (M 2

2 = {(y1, y2, y3) ∈ R3 : y1 > 0, y2 > 0, y3 > 0}, g2 = dyj ) be two Riemannian manifolds. 
i=1 j=1
Define a map F : (M1, g1) → (M2, g2) such that



26 R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 

(︃√︂ √︂ √︂ )︃
F (x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6) = x2

1 + x2 2
2, x3 + x2

4, x2 2
5 + x6 .

√︁ √︁ √︁
Fixing τ = x2 2

1 1 + x2, τ2 = x2 + x2
3 4, and τ3 = x2 + x2

5 6, we get
{︃ }︃

(ker x3 ∂
F∗) = span x2 ∂ x1 ∂ x4 ∂

U1 = − , = x6 ∂ − x5 ∂
U2 = − , U3 ,

{︃ τ1 ∂x1 τ1 ∂x2 τ2 ∂x3 τ2 ∂x4 τ3 ∂x5 τ3 ∂x6 }︃
(kerF ⊥

∗) = span = x1 ∂ 2 ∂ x3 ∂ ∂
Z1 + x

, Z2 = + x4 ∂ x5
, Z3 = + x6 ∂

,
τ1 ∂x1 τ1 ∂x2 τ2 ∂x3 τ2 ∂x4 τ3 ∂x5 τ3 ∂x6

and
{︃ }︃3

(range F∗) = span F∗(Zj) = ∂
,

∂yj j=1

{︂ }︂6 {︂ }︂3
where ∂

∂x and ∂ are bases of TpM1 and TF (p)M2 respectively. One can verify that F is a 
i ∂y

i=1 j j=1
Riemannian submersion with horizontal and vertical spaces of dimensions 3. Further, by some computations 
using all zero Christoffel symbols, we obtain

(︃ )︃
TU1U1 = − x1 ∂ + x2 ∂

,

(︃τ2
1 ∂x1 τ2

1 ∂x2)︃
3 ∂

TU2U2 = − x + x4 ∂
,

(︃τ2
2 ∂x3 τ2

2 ∂x4)︃
x5 ∂

TU3U3 = − + x6 ∂
,

τ2
3 ∂x5 τ2

3 ∂x6

and

TU U all i ̸= j.
i j = 0 for 

Moreover,

1 
g1(TU1U1, Z1) = − , g1(TU ) = g1(TU ,

τ 2U2, Z1 3U3, Z1) = 0
1

g1(TU1U1, Z2) = 0, g1(TU2U2, Z2) = − 1 
, g1(TU 0,

τ 3U3, Z2) =
2

and

g1(TU1U1, Z3) = 0, g1(TU2U2, Z3) = 0, g1(TU3U3, Z3) = − 1 
.

τ3

Equivalently,
α

for Zα = Z1, we have T𝒱 𝒱α

11 ̸= T𝒱α

22 = T33 ,
α

for Zα = Z 𝒱α

2, we have T𝒱
11 ̸= T22 ̸ α

= T𝒱
33 ,

and
α α

for Z 𝒱α

α = Z3, we have T𝒱
11 = T𝒱

22 ̸= T33 .



R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 27

Clearly, for F the inequalities obtained in Theorem 14 do not attain equality.
Furthermore, suppose that ai, bi are some real numbers for 1 ≤ i ≤ 3. Then for horizontal vectors 

X = a1Z1 + a2Z2 + a3Z3 and Y = b1Z1 + b2Z2 + b3Z3, we obtain
(︂ )︂

A M1
XY = 1

2𝒱[X,Y ] = 1
2𝒱 ∇X Y −∇M1

Y X = 0.

Therefore, A vanishes; equivalently, the horizontal distribution is integrable. Clearly, for F the inequalities 
obtained in Theorem 24 achieve equality.

In the following example, we see that the inequalities derived in Theorems 14, 24, 20, and 27 hold with 
equality.

Example 32. Let f be a positive smooth function on R a(︃nd let C be a generalized comp∑︁lex space form of rea
3 )︃l 

dimension 6. Considering a w(︄arped product manifold M1 = R×f C, g1 = dt2 + f2 ((dxi)2 + (dy 2
i) )

∑︁ )︄ i=1
4 

and a Riemannian manifold M = R4
2 , g2 = f2 (dzj)2 , we define F : (M1, g1) → (M2, g2) such that

j=1

F (t, x1, y1, x2, y2, x3, y3) = (x2, y2, x3, y3).

Then we get
{︃ }︃

(ker ∂ 1 ∂  ∂
F∗) = span U1 = , U2 = 1

, U3 = ,

{︃ ∂t f ∂x1 f ∂y1 }︃
(kerF ⊥

∗) = span = 1 ∂
Z1 = 1 ∂ 1 ∂ 1 ∂

, Z2 , Z3 = , Z4 = ,
f ∂x2 f ∂y2 f ∂x3 f ∂y3

and
{︃ }︃4

(range span 1 ∂
F∗) = F∗(Zj) =  

,
f ∂zj j=1

{︂ }︂ {︂ }︂
where ∂ 1 ∂  ∂  ∂  4

∂ 1 ∂
∂t , f ∂x , 1 , 1 , 1 ∂

∂y , 1 and ∂
1 f ∂y1 f ∂x2 f z are bases of T  respec

2 f ∂x ,  
3 ∂ pM1 and T

3 f ∂y F (p)M2,
j j=1

tively. One can verify that F is a Riemannian submersion between Riemannian manifolds with a horizontal 
space of dimension 4 and a vertical space of dimension 3. By [1], we also see that M1 is a generalized 

′2 2
Sasakian space form with c f ′′

1 = − f
f2 , c2 = 0, and c3 = − f ′

f2 + f . Further, we compute non-zero Christoffel 
′

symbols for the metric g1, which are Γt
i,i = −ff ′ and Γi

t,i = f
f for all i ∈ {xj , yj}3

j=1. Using these values, 
we obtain

∇M1 1
U U = ∇M1 1 ≤ i ≤ 3,

1 i = ∇M
U U U U2 = 0 for all 

2 3 3
′ ′ ′

∇M1 = f ∂
, M1 ∂

1 = f
,∇M1 ∂

U2 = ∇M1 f
U U

2 1
f2 ∇

∂x U U U U3 = − ,
1 3 f2 ∂y U

1 2 3 f ∂t
′

∇M1 1 ∂
Z Z = 0 for all 1 ≤ i ≠ j ≤ 4 and ∇M

i j Z Z for all 1 ≤ i ≤ 4.
i i = −f

f ∂t

This implies that ℋ∇M1
U U U 0 for all 1 ≤ i, j ≤ 3. Hence, for all Z {Z

i j = TUi j = α ∈ 1, Z2, Z3, Z4}, we have
α

T𝒱
ij = g1(TU U ,Z = 0, 1 ≤ i, j ≤ 3.

i j α)



28 R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 

Clearly, for F the inequalities obtained in Theorems 14 and 20 achieve equality. In addition, similar to the 
previous example, one can verify that A vanishes; equivalently, the horizontal distribution is integrable. 
Clearly, for F the inequalities obtained in Theorems 24 and 27 achieve equality.

Lastly, we have the following example for which the inequalities derived in Theorem 24 hold strictly.

Example 33. The submersion from S2n+1 onto CPn defined in [27, Section 5] has a non-integrable horizontal 
distribution of dimension 2n. Clearly, for this submersion, the inequalities obtained in Theorem 24 do not 
attain equality when n ≥ 2.

Remark 34. By following similar steps to the previous examples, one can also construct Riemannian maps 
(resp. submersions) for which the inequalities obtained in Theorems 5, 9, 15, and 25 hold either strictly or 
with equality. For the existence of a Riemannian map (resp. submersion) with target (resp. source) space 
as a particular generalized complex space form, we refer to [17, Example 2] (resp. [17, Example 3]).

6. Concluding remarks

In this section, we give some remarks to the readers.
The following remark explains the geometric meaning of Casorati invariants and the significance of derived 

inequalities.

Remark 35. Casorati invariants provide a geometric meaning related to the visualization of shapes and 
appearances. Precisely, in the theories of Riemannian maps and Riemannian submersions, these invariants 
indicate deviation from flatness in the orthogonal complementary spaces, such as fibers, leaves of horizontal 
distributions, and leaves of range spaces. For a surely curved surface, the Gaussian curvature may vanish, 
but the Casorati curvature will not vanish. Thus, geometrically, the Casorati curvature provides a better in
tuition than the Gaussian curvature. In the previous sections, we have generalized some optimal inequalities 
involving normalized Casorati curvatures or Casorati invariants for Riemannian maps and Riemannian sub
mersions, and have shown that these inequalities yield relationships between normalized scalar curvatures 
and normalized Casorati curvatures. The main results are established by an optimization technique using 
curvature expressions, tensor decompositions, an algebraic result (Lemma 3), etc., and showing a parabolic 
quadratic polynomial in the components of the second fundamental form or O’Neill tensors. Our generaliza
tions for Riemannian maps and Riemannian submersions are valuable to geometric optimizations, enabling 
Casorati optimization across various manifolds. In addition, these provide relationships that address the 
comparison problem between intrinsic and extrinsic invariants, as the Casorati and scalar invariants are 
considered extrinsic and intrinsic, respectively. Moreover, their equality cases characterize specific geomet
rically significant submanifolds (i.e., leaves of distributions), such as integrable, invariantly quasi-umbilical, 
etc.

The following remark describes why the structural condition r ≥ 3 on the dimensions of vertical and 
horizontal distributions has been assumed.

Remark 36. We note that the inequalities obtained in the previous sections involve normalized Casorati 
curvatures for the hyperplanes of vertical and horizontal distributions. Hence, to establish the corresponding 
meaningful inequalities, it is mandatory to take dimensions of these distributions as r ≥ 2. In addition, by 
[44, Remark 2.1], the normalized Casorati curvatures vanish trivially for r = 2. It is known that due 
to isometry, the rank of a Riemannian map is the same as the dimension of its horizontal distribution. 
Therefore, avoiding trivial circumstances, we have assumed r ≥ 3.



R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 29

The following remark discusses the importance of generalized complex and generalized Sasakian structures 
in the present study.

Remark 37. In the previous sections, we have applied our main results to the settings of generalized complex 
and generalized Sasakian structures. Since these settings unify various structures under two umbrellas, they 
facilitate the study of common properties and derivations across these structures. For example, we have 
applied the derivations by direct substitutions to obtain special cases in Corollaries 6, 10, 16, 21, 26, 
and 28. These settings also prepare the reader to understand a theory that synthesizes existing and more 
specific cases. In addition, these settings make it easier for researchers familiar with the fundamentals 
to transition to more advanced/generalized theories. Moreover, such generalized manifolds have several 
applications in geometry, general relativity, theoretical physics, and related areas, including the construction 
of new interesting examples. Hence, the obtained relations for generalized complex and generalized Sasakian 
structures may serve as bridges between those areas and may attract readers to future research in this 
direction.

Authors’ contributions

All authors have equal contributions.

Ethics approval

The work submitted is original and has not been submitted to more than one journal for simultaneous 
consideration.

Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process

Not applicable.

Funding

The first author is supported by the Human Resource Development Group, Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research, New Delhi, India (File No: 09/0013(16054)/2022-EMR-I).

Declaration of competing interest

Not applicable.

Acknowledgments

We thank anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments, which greatly improved the paper. The 
author, K. Meena, sincerely thanks Prof. Bayram Şahin (Ege University, Turkiye) for fruitful discussion 
during the preparation of the first draft.

Data availability

Not available.



30 R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 

References

[1] P. Alegre, D.E. Blair, A. Carriazo, Generalized Sasakian-space-forms, Isr. J. Math. 141 (2004) 157--183.
[2] M. Aquib, J.W. Lee, G.E. Vîlcu, D.W. Yoon, Classification of Casorati ideal Lagrangian submanifolds in complex space 

forms, Differ. Geom. Appl. 63 (2019) 30--49.
[3] M. Aquib, M.H. Shahid, M. Jamali, Lower extremities for generalized normalized δ-Casorati curvatures of bi-slant sub

manifolds in generalized complex space forms, Kragujev. J. Math. 42 (4) (2018) 591--605.
[4] D.E. Blair, Riemannian Geometry of Contact and Symplectic Manifolds, Birkhäuser, Boston, 2010.
[5] F. Casorati, Mesure de la courbure des surfaces suivant l’idée commune, Acta Math. 14 (1890) 95--110.
[6] B.Y. Chen, Recent developments in δ-Casorati curvature invariants, Turk. J. Math. 45 (1) (2021) 1--46.
[7] S. Decu, S. Haesen, L. Verstraelen, Optimal inequalities characterising quasi-umbilical submanifolds, J. Inequal. Pure 

Appl. Math. 9 (3) (2008) 1--17.
[8] I.K. Erken, C. Murathan, Anti-invariant Riemannian submersion from Sasakian manifolds, arXiv preprint, arXiv:1302.

4906v1 [math.DG], 2013.
[9] I.K. Erken, C. Murathan, Riemannian warped product submersions, Result. Math. 76 (2021) 1--14.

[10] M. Falcitelli, S. Ianus, A.M. Pastore, Riemannian Submersions and Related Topics, World Scientific, River Edge, NJ, 2004.
[11] T. Fatima, R. Maini, G. Gupta, R. Kumar, R. Sachdeva, R. Rani, Optimal inequalities involving Casorati curvatures for 

Riemannian maps to nearly Kaehler manifolds, J. Inequal. Appl. 2025 (2025) 1--22.
[12] A.E. Fischer, Riemannian maps between Riemannian manifolds, Contemp. Math. 132 (1992) 331--366.
[13] E. García-Río, D.N. Kupeli, Semi-Riemannian Maps and Their Applications, Kluwer, 1999.
[14] V. Ghişoiu, Inequalities for the Casorati curvatures of slant submanifolds in complex space forms, in: Proc. Riemannian 

Geometry and Applications, Bucharest, Romania, 2011, pp. 145--150.
[15] Y. Gündüzalp, M.A. Akyol, Remarks on conformal anti-invariant Riemannian maps to cosymplectic manifolds, Hacet. J. 

Math. Stat. 50 (4) (2021) 1131--1139.
[16] S. Kumar, R. Prasad, Conformal anti-invariant submersions from Sasakian manifolds, Glob. J. Pure Appl. Math. 13 (7) 

(2017) 3577--3600.
[17] C.W. Lee, J.W. Lee, B. Şahin, G.E. Vîlcu, Optimal inequalities for Riemannian maps and Riemannian submersions 

involving Casorati curvatures, Ann. Mat. Pura Appl. 200 (3) (2021) 1277--1295.
[18] J.W. Lee, C.W. Lee, G.E. Vîlcu, Classification of Casorati ideal Legendrian submanifolds in Sasakian space forms, J. 

Geom. Phys. 155 (2020) 1--13.
[19] C.W. Lee, J.W. Lee, G.E. Vîlcu, Classification of Casorati ideal Legendrian submanifolds in Sasakian space forms II, J. 

Geom. Phys. 171 (2022) 1--10.
[20] C.W. Lee, J.W. Lee, G.E. Vîlcu, Optimal inequalities for the normalized δ-Casorati curvatures of submanifolds in Kenmotsu 

space forms, Adv. Geom. 17 (3) (2017) 355--362.
[21] M.A. Lone, An inequality for generalized normalized δ-Casorati curvatures of slant submanifolds in generalized complex 

space form, Balk. J. Geom. Appl. 22 (1) (2017) 41--50.
[22] M.A. Lone, Some inequalities for generalized normalized δ-Casorati curvatures of slant submanifolds in generalized Sasakian 

space form, Novi Sad J. Math. 47 (1) (2017) 129--141.
[23] M.A. Lone, Optimal inequalities for generalized normalized δ-Casorati curvatures for bi-slant submanifolds of Kenmotsu 

space forms, J. Dyn. Syst. Geom. Theor. 17 (1) (2019) 39--50.
[24] M.A. Lone, M.H. Shahid, G.E. Vîlcu, On Casorati curvatures of submanifolds in pointwise Kenmotsu space forms, Math. 

Phys. Anal. Geom. 22 (1) (2019) 1--14.
[25] K. Meena, B. Şahin, H.M. Shah, Riemannian warped product maps, Result. Math. 79 (2) (2024) 1--30.
[26] T. Nore, Second fundamental form of a map, Ann. Mat. Pura Appl. 146 (1986) 281--310.
[27] B. O’Neill, The fundamental equations of a submersion, Mich. Math. J. 13 (4) (1966) 459--469.
[28] Z. Olszak, On the existence of generalized complex space forms, Isr. J. Math. 65 (2) (1989) 214--218.
[29] B. Ons, P. Verstraelen, Some geometrical comments on vision and neurobiology: seeing Gauss and Gabor walking by, 

when looking through the window of the Parma at Leuven in the company of Casorati, Kragujev. J. Math. 35 (2) (2011) 
317--325.

[30] G. Polat, J.W. Lee, B. Şahin, Optimal inequalities involving Casorati curvatures along Riemannian maps and Riemannian 
submersions for Sasakian space forms, J. Geom. Phys. 210 (2025) 1--15.

[31] G. Polat, J.W. Lee, B. Şahin, Corrigendum to ``Optimal inequalities involving Casorati curvatures along Riemannian maps 
and Riemannian submersions for Sasakian space forms'' [J. Geom. Phys. 210 (2025) 105417], J. Geom. Phys. 217 (2025) 
1--2.

[32] B. Şahin, Invariant and anti-invariant Riemannian maps to Kähler manifolds, Int. J. Geom. Methods Mod. Phys. 7 (3) 
(2010) 337--355.

[33] B. Şahin, Anti-invariant Riemannian submersions from almost Hermitian manifolds, Cent. Eur. J. Math. 8 (3) (2010) 
437--447.

[34] B. Şahin, Riemannian submersions from almost Hermitian manifolds, Taiwan. J. Math. 17 (2) (2013) 629--659.
[35] B. Şahin, Riemannian Submersions, Riemannian Maps in Hermitian Geometry and Their Applications, Elsevier, Academic 

Press, 2017.
[36] A.N. Siddiqui, Optimal Casorati inequalities on bi-slant submanifolds in generalized Sasakian space forms, Tamkang J. 

Math. 49 (3) (2018) 245--255.
[37] F. Tricerri, L. Vanhecke, Curvature tensors on almost Hermitian manifolds, Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 267 (2) (1981) 365--398.
[38] M.M. Tripathi, Inequalities for algebraic Casorati curvature and their applications, Note Mat. 37 (1) (2017) 161--186.
[39] L. Vanhecke, Almost Hermitian manifolds with J-invariant Riemannian curvature tensor, Rend. Semin. Mat. Univ. Politec. 

Torino 34 (1975--1976) 487--498.



R. Singh et al. / J. Math. Anal. Appl. 558 (2026) 130436 31

[40] G.E. Vîlcu, An optimal inequality for Lagrangian submanifolds in complex space forms involving Casorati curvature, J. 
Math. Anal. Appl. 465 (2) (2018) 1209--1222.

[41] K. Yano, M. Kon, Structure on Manifolds, World Scientific, Singapore, 1984.
[42] A. Zaidi, G. Shanker, Bi-slant Riemannian maps to Kenmotsu manifolds and some optimal inequalities, arXiv preprint, 

arXiv:2409.01636 [math.DG], 2024.
[43] L. Zhang, X. Pan, P. Zhang, Inequalities for Casorati curvature of Lagrangian submanifolds in complex space forms, Adv. 

Math. (China) 5 (2016) 767--777.
[44] P. Zhang, L. Zhang, Inequalities for Casorati curvatures of submanifolds in real space forms, Adv. Geom. 16 (3) (2016) 

329--335.



RESEARCH ARTICLE |  FEBRUARY 06 2026

Nonlinear coupled-mode framework for coupled systems:
From exact Hamiltonian models to improved reduced-order
formulations 
Shubham Garg  ; Kirankumar R. Hiremath  

Chaos 36, 023119 (2026)
https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0302806

 
View Export

Online Citation

Articles You May Be Interested In
Perfect sound absorption induced by topological acoustic unidirectional guided resonance
J. Appl. Phys. (December 2025)

Mid-infrared intersubband polaritons in dispersive metal-insulator-metal resonators
Appl. Phys. Lett. (August 2014)

Resonant exceptional points sensing in terahertz metasurfaces
Appl. Phys. Lett. (March 2024)

 11 March 2026 07:23:53



Chaos ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/cha

Nonlinear coupled-mode framework for coupled
systems: From exact Hamiltonian models to
improved reduced-order formulations

Cite as: Chaos 36, 023119 (2026); doi: 10.1063/5.0302806
Submitted: 17 September 2025 · Accepted: 21 January 2026 ·
Published Online: 6 February 2026 View Online Export Citation CrossMark

Shubham Garga) and Kirankumar R. Hiremathb)

AFFILIATIONS

Department of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Jodhpur, Rajasthan 342030, India

a)Electronic mail: garg.14@iitj.ac.in
b)Author to whom correspondence should be addressed: k.r.hiremath@iitj.ac.in

ABSTRACT

Accurate modeling of coupled nonlinear phenomena is essential for predicting energy transfer in many physical systems; however,
conventional coupled-mode theory often relies on approximations that limit its validity under moderate and strong coupling. In this study, a
nonlinear coupled-mode framework is developed that systematically incorporates key nonlinear interactions and counter-propagating wave
effects, which are typically neglected in traditional formulations. To illustrate the approach, two nonlinear LC circuits containing Josephson
junctions are analyzed. Starting from an exact Hamiltonian description, a reduced-order formulation is derived that retains the essential
nonlinear and self-coupling contributions, including rapidly oscillating terms. Comparative analysis demonstrates that the conventional
coupled-mode model captures only qualitative trends and exhibits significant phase and amplitude errors outside the weak-coupling regime.
In contrast, the proposed reduced-order formulation achieves a close quantitative agreement with the exact Hamiltonian dynamics across the
weak-to-strong coupling regimes. These findings clarify the limitations of existing phenomenological models and establish a systematic path-
way for constructing accurate reduced-order descriptions of coupled nonlinear systems, with implications for circuit dynamics, photonics,
and related areas involving energy transfer in complex media.

Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0302806

Coupled nonlinear systems govern energy transfer in diverse I. INTRODUCTION
fields, including electronics, photonics, and neuromorphic In many physical systems, such as coupled waveguides, res-
devices. The conventional coupled-mode theory is widely used onant circuits, and oscillatory networks, the behavior of indi-
to model these dynamics; however, it relies on approximations vidual components is influenced by their interactions with other
that fail under moderate and strong couplings. In this study, we components. To completely understand the system, one must solve
developed a nonlinear coupled-mode framework derived from an a coupled system of differential equations with suitable initial or
exact Hamiltonian formulation that systematically incorporates boundary conditions, which is challenging to achieve. Analytical
nonlinear interactions, self-coupling, and backward-propagating solutions are rare, and direct numerical simulations can be compu-
effects that are often neglected. Using coupled LC circuits with tationally intensive, particularly in the presence of nonlinearities.
Josephson junctions as an example, we constructed a reduced- To address these challenges, researchers frequently turn to
order model that closely reproduces the exact dynamics across reduced-order models that capture the essential dynamics without
the weak-to-strong coupling regimes. Comparative studies show requiring full-scale simulations within a weak coupling framework.1
that while traditional models capture only qualitative behavior, Among such approaches, Coupled-Mode Theory (CMT) has proven
the proposed formulation achieves quantitative accuracy. This especially useful in explaining energy exchange and mode interac-
approach establishes a systematic pathway for building reliable tions in weakly coupled systems. The CMT offers a phenomeno-
reduced-order models of complex nonlinear systems with broad logical framework in which the evolution of interacting modes is
applications in physics and engineering fields. described using simplified ordinary differential equations, making

Chaos 36, 023119 (2026); doi: 10.1063/5.0302806 36, 023119-1

Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing

 11 March 2026 07:23:53



Chaos ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/cha

it an attractive tool in fields, such as photonics, microwave engi- an improved version of the TCMT model, using the Hamiltonian
neering, and coupled resonators.2,3 Beyond its computational advan- formulation and canonical transformations for coupled linear LC
tages, CMT also offers valuable physical insights by reducing the circuits, and derived the CMT equations in Eq. (2) with the correct
system to simpler ordinary differential equations. This allows one to expressions for both the self and cross-coupling coefficients,7

isolate and assess the influence of individual terms or physical effects
by selectively including or excluding them in the analysis.4 da+

1 = j (ω1 + κ
There are two widely used formulations of the CMT:5,6 Spatial 1+1+) a+

dt 1 +κ1+2+a+
2 ,

(4)
coupled-mode theory (SCMT), which deals with mode evolu- da+

2
tion along spatial coordinates, and temporal coupled-mode the- = κ2+ +

1+a +j (ω2 + κ2+2+) a+
dt 1 2 ,

ory (TCMT), which focuses on time-domain dynamics. This study
focused on TCMT. with

To illustrate the basic structure of TCMT, consider two uncou-
C √

pled systems, each characterized by a single mode evolving at natural κ1+2+ = κ2+1+ = − √ c
j ω1ω2,

frequencies ω 2 C1C2
1 and ω2. The amplitudes a+

1 (t) and a+
2 (t) satisfy the (5)

equations jCcω1 jC ω2
κ1+1+ = , κ2+2+ = c

,
da+ 2C

1 1 2C2
= jω1a

+,
dt 1

(1) where Cc is the coupling capacitor and C1, L1, C2, L2 are the capaci-
da+

2 = tance and inductance of circuits 1 and 2, respectively. As interpreted
jω +

2a2 ,
dt by Haus, the coupling coefficients in Eq. (5) involve the geomet-

√ ric mean of the natural frequencies ω
where j = −1, and 1 and ω2. Although Eq. (4)

ω1, ω2 represent the eigenvalues corresponding
significantly improves our understanding of coupled linear oscilla-

to eigenfunctions a+
1 (t), a+

2 (t), respectively. The amplitudes a+
1 (t)

tors, many physical systems of interest, particularly those involving
and a+

2 (t) represent the forward-propagating modes. Similarly, there
Josephson junctions, operate in inherently nonlinear regimes. In

are backward-propagating modes a−
1 (t) and a−

2 (t). When the sys-
such settings, the linear TCMT framework is inadequate. The gen-

tems are weakly coupled, the effect of the backward-propagating
eralization of CMT to nonlinear systems has been explored using

modes can be neglected. By considering the example of weakly
perturbation methods and phenomenological arguments,3,4,8,9 but a

coupled LC circuits, Haus proposed a phenomenological model to
systematic and analytically tractable formulation remains an active

understand the interaction between a+
1 (t) and a+

2 (t), leading to2
area of research.

da+ Early studies extended the CMT to nonlinear systems, notably
1 = jω + +

1a
d 1 +κ1+2+a2 ,
t the work of Crosignani et al. on optical fibers with Kerr-type non-

(2) linearities and de Sterke and Sipe on periodic structures, such as
da+

2 = κ Bragg gratings.10,11 These formulations introduced self-phase modu-
2+1+a+ +

2a
d 1 +jω 2 .
t lation and revealed the limitations of the linear CMT under non-

A similar modeling framework can be formulated for a broad class linear interactions. Subsequent contributions refined the theory
of coupled phenomena across various domains, including physics to include soliton-like dynamics in long-period gratings.12 Further
and engineering disciplines. Equation (2) involves only positive- studies have applied nonlinear CMT to graphene-based waveguides
frequency components, which is known as co-directional coupling. and other emerging platforms, demonstrating the broad relevance
Additionally, Eq. (2) involves four parameter ω of the framework.13

1, ω2, κ1+2+ , and
κ In parallel, TCMT was developed as a general framework for

2+1+ . In the case of coupled linear LC circuits, the first two param-
eters ω resonant light–matter interactions and has since been widely applied

k = √ 1 ; k = 1, 2 represent the natural frequencies of the
LkCk to photonic crystals and resonators.14 Comprehensive reviews of

individual LC circuits 1 and 2. The remaining two parameters are nonlinear TCMT and its applications can be found in Refs. 3 and 15.
the coupling coefficients, whose approximate values are given by2

While most early developments in nonlinear CMT focused on
−jC −jC optics, similar reduced-order modeling approaches have emerged in

κ1+2+ = √ c
ω2, κ2+1+ = √ c

ω1. (3) other domains. For example, nonlinear mode interactions have been
2 C1C2 2 C1C2

analyzed in network-oscillator-based coupled systems representing
Additionally, the total energy is given by E = |a+ 2

1 |2 + |a+
2 | . Energy a two-dimensional compressible fluid flow,16 coupling between dif-

conservation, i.e., dE = 0, imposed the constraint κ . ferent modes of a buckled beam,17 the complex Ginzburg–Landau
dt 1+2+ = −κ∗

2+1+
Furthermore, since κ1+2+ = −κ∗ hat the equation describing the dynamics of spatially extended systems,18

2+1+ , Haus mentioned t
parameter values of κ1+2+ and κ2+1+ are approximate, and the quan- and a large network of oscillators, where each oscillator represents
tities ω1 and ω2 in Eq. (3) should be “interpreted” as the arithmetic the Landau–Stuart oscillator,19,20 soliton interactions in a higher-
or geometric mean of the two natural frequencies.2 order coupled nonlinear Schrödinger equation,21 and magnetization

Haus proposed a phenomenological model expressed by Eq. (2) oscillations in spin-torque nano-oscillators.22

by considering the example of coupled linear LC circuits.2 Despite its Traditional TCMT fails to accurately describe systems with
simplicity, this formulation has been highly successful in explain- low-quality-factor resonances. To address this, Zhang and Miller
ing linear coupling in various systems.3,6 Recently, we proposed introduced the quasinormal coupled-mode theory (QCMT), an

Chaos 36, 023119 (2026); doi: 10.1063/5.0302806 36, 023119-2

Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing

 11 March 2026 07:23:53



Chaos ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/cha

extension of CMT tailored for highly lossy systems.23,24 Their com-
parison showed that the QCMT significantly improved the accuracy.
Quasinormal modes, which are eigenfunctions of non-Hermitian
operators, form the foundation of the QCMT, with further devel-
opments presented in Refs. 25 and 26. In this study, we focused on
the Hamiltonian framework of the nonlinear TCMT formulation.

To introduce the improved TCMT formulation for coupled
nonlinear systems, we consider a nonlinear LC circuit that includes a
Josephson junction. In Sec. II, we first discuss a general phenomeno-
logical TCMT formulation for coupled nonlinear phenomena and
its limitations. In Sec. III, we apply the Hamiltonian framework

FIG. 1. Coupled nonlinear LC circuits: Two nonlinear LC circuits consisting of
to derive an exact nonlinear TCMT model for coupled LC circuits capacitors C1,C2 and Josephson junctions J1, J2 are connected in series with a
containing Josephson junctions. This model captures third-order coupling capacitor Cc.
nonlinear interactions between forward- and backward-propagating
waves, an essential feature not addressed in prior studies, which
often disregarded backward-wave dynamics entirely. The linear
limit of the exact nonlinear model is fully consistent with the flux- given as

based TCMT formulation for coupled linear LC circuits, as derived
separately in Appendix A. This agreement confirms that the pro- ȧ+

1 = jω1a
+
1 + (

κ1+2+a+
2 + 1) 1

γ3,0 |a+
1 |2a+

1 + ( )
γ2,1 |a+

1 |2a+
2

posed nonlinear model seamlessly extends the established linear
+ (1)

γ1,2 |a+
2 |2a+ (1)

1 +γ +
0,3 |a2 |2a+

theory without introducing any discrepancies. Furthermore, based 2 ,

on numerical simulations, we constructed a reduced-order model (6)
ȧ+

2 = jω2a
+ (
2 +κ2+1+a+

1 + 2) 2
γ3,0 |a+

1 |2a+
1 + ( )

γ2,1 |a+
1 |2a+

by retaining only the dominant terms of backward-propagating 2

waves. In Sec. IV, we perform a numerical comparison of the + (2)
γ1,2 |a+

2 |2a+ (2)
1 + γ +

0,3 |a2 |2a+
2 ,

exact, reduced, and phenomenological nonlinear TCMT models,
highlighting the importance of the improved TCMT formulation.

where (l)
γi,k are unknown nonlinear interaction coefficients with

0 ≤ i, k ≤ 3 and i + k = 3 for l = 1, 2. It should be noted that the
II. PHENOMENOLOGICAL TCMT MODEL FOR COUPLED specific form of the phenomenological TCMT model depends on
NONLINEAR CIRCUITS an underlying physical system. Some interaction terms may be

absent, depending on the system under consideration.3,15,30
Haus proposed a phenomenological TCMT model for linear How-

coupled systems, expressed as in Eq. (2).2 In our earlier work, we ever, the structure given in Eq. (6) represents a general framework
developed an improved TCMT formulation, as given by Eq. (4), and for modeling coupled nonlinear dynamics.
derived an exact model in terms of forward (a+) and backward (a−) In Eq. (6), the first two terms describe the linear coupling,
propagating waves using the Hamiltonian approach.7 This deriva- which is consistent with the standard TCMT in Eq. (2), whereas
tion was carried out in the charge formulation, whereas the corre- the remaining terms account for nonlinear interactions between the
sponding flux-based formulation is presented in Appendix A. The amplitudes. The coefficients (l)

γi,k are system-dependent; their imagi-
two descriptions are connected through the relations q(t) = C8̇(t) nary parts correspond to self- and cross-phase modulation, whereas
and q̇(t) = −8(t)/L, where the negative sign reflects the chosen the real parts may represent nonlinear loss or gain owing to Kerr
reference direction for the current. nonlinearity in the optical domain.3 The remaining nonlinear terms

Although a linear LC circuit configuration was selected for ana- correspond to different wave mixing processes, enabling energy
lytical simplicity, the methodology is general and can be extended to exchange between interacting waves, as observed in Kerr-type non-
a broad class of coupled nonlinear systems. Consider two nonlinear linear photonic bandgap structures.30 A generic formulation of the
LC circuits each consisting of a Josephson junction (denoted by J1 nonlinear coupled-mode theory should include additional terms
and J2) coupled through a coupling capacitor Cc, as shown in Fig. 1. representing four-wave mixing (FWM) and third-harmonic gen-
In an LC circuit, the Josephson-junction functions as a nonlinear eration (THG). The interpretation of nonlinear interaction terms
inductor. A Josephson junction is a superconducting device consist- in domains beyond optics can be found in the literature, such as
ing of two superconductors separated by a thin insulating layer or network-oscillator-based modeling of periodic bluff body flows,16

a normal metal, which enables the tunneling of Cooper pairs.27 For vibration modes of a buckled beam,17 complex Ginzburg–Landau
comprehensive reviews of the role of Josephson junctions in super- equation,18 system of heterogeneous coupled oscillators modeled by
conducting quantum and neural circuits, see Refs. 28 and 29. Such the Landau–Stuart equation,19,20 and spin-torque nano-oscillators.22

coupled nonlinear LC circuits provide a representative physical sys- In Eq. (6), a+
1,2 represent the forward-propagating waves of sys-

tem for exploring the general framework of nonlinear coupled-mode tems 1 and 2, respectively. Likewise, there are backward-propagating
theory. waves a−

1,2. The literature commonly neglects backward-propagating
There are different variants of TCMT discussed in the wave effects under the assumption of weak coupling,2,3 although

literature.3,15,30 Based on that, a general phenomenological TCMT this approximation becomes unreliable as the coupling strength
model describing the dynamics of coupled nonlinear systems is increases.

Chaos 36, 023119 (2026); doi: 10.1063/5.0302806 36, 023119-3

Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing

 11 March 2026 07:23:53



Chaos ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/cha

This simplification is often justified in systems without struc- the methodology developed here is generic. By defining the system
tural defects or in configurations, such as long-period fiber Hamiltonian and applying an appropriate set of canonical transfor-
gratings.12,31 In Ref. 32, the authors considered a nonlinear mations, an equivalent nonlinear coupled-mode model can be sys-
TCMT framework that incorporates nonlinear interactions between tematically derived for other physical systems, including photonic
forward- and backward-propagating waves while deliberately omit- and optical resonator systems. This provides a rigorous pathway to
ting their linear couplings. They argued that such linear terms construct consistent reduced-order models directly from first prin-
represent rapidly oscillating contributions and can be neglected. ciples, highlighting the role of backward-propagating waves in the

Despite these advancements, existing nonlinear TCMT models system and enabling accurate derivation of the self-coupling, cross
rely heavily on phenomenological arguments and often omit criti- coupling, and nonlinear terms coefficients. It, thereby, resolves the
cal interactions, particularly the role of backward-propagating waves ambiguities and ill-posedness present in previous phenomenological
and their nonlinear effects on the system. Therefore, an exact model CMT formulations, as discussed further in Secs. III–IV.
for coupled nonlinear systems that incorporates both forward- and
backward-propagating waves is required, which is the focus of III. HAMILTONIAN APPROACH FOR TCMT MODELING
Sec. III. In earlier models, the coupling coefficients were not derived
directly from the underlying governing physical laws, which reduced A. Exact model for coupled nonlinear LC circuits

their accuracy. To address this, we developed an improved non- The governing equations for two coupled nonlinear LC circuits,
linear TCMT framework using the Hamiltonian approach, which each containing a Josephson junction, are derived from the system
can describe both forward and backward dynamics with analytically Hamiltonian using canonical transformations. The complete deriva-
obtained coupling terms. Although the present analysis focused on tion is provided in Appendix B. The final form of the exact model is
coupled nonlinear LC circuits for clarity and analytical tractability, expressed as

( )

ȧ + ( )

= jω1 + κ +
1+1+ a1 +κ1+ −a−

1 1 +κ1+ +
2+a2 +κ −a−+α − (a+ 2 −

1 1+2 2 2a1 1 ) − 2
(a1 )

( ) ( )

( ) ( ) ( )

− 2 2 (

β + −
1 a2 −a2 a+

1 − 3 a−
1 − 2a+a− + + 2

1 1 + β2 a2 + 2
a−)

2 (a2 ) − (a−
2 ) ,

( )

( )

ȧ −
1 = κ1−1+a+

1 − jω1 + κ1−1− a−
1 +κ1−2+a++ 2 2

2 κ1−2−a−
2 +α2a

+
1 (a+

1 ) − (a−
1 )

( ) ( )

( (

+ +)2 ( )2 ) 2
β + −) a+a− ( +

1 a2 −a2 3 a1 − a−
1 + 2 1 1 + β + −

2 a2 (a+ (a− 2
a2 2 ) − 2 ) ,

(7)
( )

( )

ȧ +
2 = κ2+ +

1+a1 +κ2+1−a−
1 + jω + κ a+ − − 2

2 2+2+ 2 + 2
κ +2−a2 + + α −

1a2 (a+
2 2 ) − (a2 )

( ) ( )

( ) ( ) ( )

− 2 ( )2 2 2
β2 a+

1 −a−
1 a+

2 − 3 a−
2 − 2a+

2 a−
2 + β1 a+

1 +a−
1 (a+

1 ) − (a−
1 ) ,

( )

) 2 2
ȧ −

2 = κ2−1+a+
1 +κ2−1−a−

1 +κ2− + (

2+a2 − jω2 + κ2−2− a−
2 +α1a

+
2 (a+

2 ) − (a−
2 )

( ) ( )

( ) ( )

+ 2 ( )2
β + ( ) 2

2 a+
1 −a−

1 3 a+
2 − a−

2 + 2a2 a−
2 + β1 a+

1 +a−
1 (a+

1 ) − (a− 2
1 ) ,

where and

jCcC1ω1 jCcC2ω2 √ √
κ 1 C ω

1+1+ = κ1−1− = , κ2+2+ = κ2−2− = , (8) 2 C1C2
2α 2α αi = (Ci + Cc) and βi = cωi ω1

, i = 1, 2,
8α 32αIci

jC (11)
cC1ω1 jCcC1ω1

κ1+1− = − , κ1−1+ = ,
2α 2α

(9) with α = C1C2 + Cc(C1 + C2). Equation (7) represents an exact
jC C jC C

κ model for coupled nonlinear LC circuits, involving third-order non-
2+2− = − c 2ω2

, κ2−2+ = c 2ω2
,

2α 2α linear interactions between forward- and backward-propagating

√ waves a+
1,2 and a−

1,2, respectively, derived directly from the Hamil-
jCc C1C2 √ tonian without any phenomenological approximations and, thus,

κ1+2+ = κ1−2+ = κ2+1+ = κ2−1+ = ω1ω2,
2α serves as the reference model for comparisons.
√ (10)

jCc C1C2 √ • The first four terms in Eq. (7) are identical to those in the
κ1+2− = κ1−2− = κ2+1− = κ2−1− = − ω1ω2,

2α coupled linear LC circuits in Eq. (A14).

Chaos 36, 023119 (2026); doi: 10.1063/5.0302806 36, 023119-4

Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing

 11 March 2026 07:23:53



Chaos ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/cha

• The values of the parameters κ ’s are given by Eqs. (8)–(10). The while completely neglecting the effects of backward-propagating
coefficients κ1+1+ , κ1−1− , κ2+2+ , and κ2−2− are the corrections waves. In constructing this reduced model, we initially assumed
in the natural frequencies ω1 and ω2 due to the coupling and that the backward-propagating waves influenced the forward-wave
are known as self-coupling coefficients. The coupling terms in dynamics linearly and vice versa. The same reasoning was intro-
Eq. (9) represent the interactions between opposite-propagating duced and validated in our earlier study on a single nonlinear LC
waves in the same circuit. circuit containing a Josephson junction, where a reduced-order

• The cross-coupling coefficients in Eq. (10) are consistent with model [see Eqs. (B4)–(B5)] was constructed by incorporating the
those derived in the TCMT equations for coupled LC circuits linear influence of backward-propagating waves and vice versa.34

in flux formulation, as in Eq. (A16). Note that under the weak- Consequently, in the exact model given in Eq. (7), all higher-
coupling framework α ≈ C1C2,33 the expressions for the cou- order interaction terms in the evolution of ȧ+

1 involving second
pling coefficients κ ’s match exactly with those obtained in the and third-order powers of a−

1 and a−
2 were initially neglected. Sim-

charge formulation.7 ilarly, higher-order terms in the dynamics of ȧ−
1 containing sec-

• The nonlinear terms with coefficients αi(i = 1, 2) correspond to ond and third-order powers of a+
1 and a+

2 were discarded. An
self-nonlinearities that are also present in a single nonlinear LC analogous argument was applied to the equations governing ȧ+

2
oscillator, as expressed in Eq. (B1), consisting an additional cor- and ȧ−

2 .
rection term due to coupling. The remaining nonlinear terms, However, a numerical study of the exact model in Eq. (7)
associated with βi(i = 1, 2), describe the cross-nonlinear inter- reveals that some of these terms play a dominant role and cannot
actions between the subsystems. 3

be eliminated from this equation. In particular, the term α2(a
−
1 )

3
The full model in Eq. (7) can be systematically reduced by con- significantly affects the evolution of ȧ+

1 , while α2(a
+ 3
1 ) , α1(a

−
2 ) ,

sidering only the linear effects of the backward-propagating waves, and α1(a
+ 3
2 ) strongly influence ȧ−

1 , ȧ+
2 , and ȧ−

2 , respectively. There-
as discussed in Sec. III B. While earlier studies often neglected these fore, we retained these dominant contributions while discarding the
components entirely,3,15 the proposed reduction preserves their first- remaining higher-order terms with negligible impact, particularly
order effects, leading to a more accurate and physically consistent in the weak-coupling regime. Thus, the resulting reduced model
simplification of coupled nonlinear dynamics. retains only the dominating nonlinear and backward-wave coupling

terms required to capture the essential energy exchange dynamics
while maintaining analytical tractability.

B. Reduced model for coupled nonlinear LC circuits To identify the dominant interactions, detailed numerical stud-
Equation (7) for coupled nonlinear LC circuits captures the ies were conducted over a time range of t = 0 to t = 1000 s, where

exact dynamics of the system, including the third-order nonlinear the contributions of each nonlinear term were evaluated separately.
interactions between forward- and backward-propagating waves. Term-by-term validation is not included here; instead, the cumu-
However, owing to the complexity of the system and the need for lative effect of these approximations is assessed by comparing the
a simpler formulation, we derived a reduced-order model. exact, reduced, and phenomenological TCMT models in Sec. IV.

The phenomenological coupled-mode equations in Eqs. (2) Based on these numerical insights and the relation in Eq. (B3), we
and (6) describe interactions among forward-propagating waves propose the following reduced-order model:

ȧ + ( ) (

= jω1 + κ +
1+1+ a1 +κ1+1−a−

1 1 +κ1+2+a+
2 +κ1+2−a−

2 −jα2|a+
1 |2a+ a−)

1 − 3
α2 1

( )

− 2jβ +
1|a 2

1 | a+ ( )

2 +β + 2
1 a1 a−

2 +jβ2|a+
2 |2a−

2 −β2 (a+ 2
2 ) + j|a+

2 |2 a+
2 ,

)

ȧ − + (

1 = κ1−1+a1 − jω1 + κ1−1− a−
1 +κ + ( )

1−2+a2 +κ1−2−a−
2 +α + 3

2 a1 + jα 2 −
2|a−

1 | a1

( )

(

+ 2jβ1|a−
1 |2a−

2 −β1 a−)2
1 a+ −

2 −jβ2|a2 |2a+
2 − 2

β2 (a−
2 ) − j|a− −

2 |2 a2 ,
(12)

) (

ȧ +
2 = κ2+1+a+ (

1 +κ2+1−a−
1 + jω +

2 + κ2+2+ a2 +κ2+2−a−
2 −jα1|a+

2 |2a+
2 −α1 a−)3

2

( )

− 2jβ + a+ ( )

2|a 2
2 | 1 +β + 2

2 a2 a−
1 +jβ1|a+

1 |2a−
1 + + 2

β1 (a1 ) − j|a+
1 |2 a+

1 ,

(

ȧ − +
2 = κ2−1+a1 +κ2−1−a−

1 +κ2−2+a+ ) ( )

2 − 2 + κ − +
2−2− a2 + 3

jω α1 a2 + jα 2 −
1|a−

2 | a2

( )

(

+ 2jβ2|a−
2 |2a−

1 −β2 a−)2
2 a+ −

1 −jβ1|a1 |2a+
1 − 2

β1 (a−
1 ) − j|a− −

1 |2 a1 ,

where the values of the parameters κ ’s and βi are the same as those in Eqs. (8)–(11).

Chaos 36, 023119 (2026); doi: 10.1063/5.0302806 36, 023119-5

Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing

 11 March 2026 07:23:53



Chaos ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/cha

Similar to the phenomenological nonlinear CMT model in Eq. (6), it is not necessary to consider all the equations in the reduced model
to obtain a solution. By focusing on the positive-frequency waves and using the relation in Eq. (B3), the reduced system is given as

ȧ + ( ) ( ) ( )

1 = ∗ ∗
jω1 + κ + a+ +

1+1 1 −jκ1+1− a1 + κ1+ +
2+a2 −jκ1+2− a+

2 − jα2|a+ 2
1 | a+

1
( )

( ( )

− ∗)3 2( )∗
jα + 2 +

2 (a+
1 ) − 2jβ +

1|a1 |2a+
2 −jβ1 a+ + ( )∗

1 a+
2 + β2|a2 |2 a+

2 − β2 (a2 ) + j|a2 |2 a+
2 ,

(13)
( )∗ ( ) ( )∗

ȧ +
2 = κ2+1+a+

1 −jκ2+1− a+
1 − + jω2 + κ +

2+2+ a2 −jκ2+2− a+ 2
2 − jα1|a+

2 | a+
2

( )

( ( )

− ∗)3 ( ) ∗
jα1 (a+

2 ) − 2( )∗
2jβ +

2|a2 |2a+
1 −jβ2 a+

2 a+
1 + β + + 2

1|a1 |2 a+
1 + β1 (a1 ) − j|a+

1 |2 a+
1 .

Equation (13) represents the final form of the reduced-order model, thus, do not influence the comparison in the identical case.7 How-
where the dynamics are captured solely in terms of the forward- ever, for non-identical coupled systems, their contributions become

∗ 3
propagating waves a+ significantly more critical.

1 and a+
2 . The third-order terms jα2((a

+
1 ) )

∗ 3
and j The simulations were performed using the initial conditions

α1((a
+
2 ) ) originate from backward-propagating components

and can be neglected for small amplitude values. Additionally, 81(0) = 1, 8̇1(0) = 0, 82(0) = 0, and 8̇2(0) = 0, which corre-

the linear coupling terms involving sponded to an initial excitation only in the first circuit. The initial
κ1+1− , κ1+2− , κ2+1− , and κ2+2−

correspond to rapidly oscillating interactions between counter- values of the amplitudes a±
1,2 were obtained using Eq. (B7).

propagating waves. These terms are commonly omitted in the litera-
ture under the rotating wave approximation, as their time-averaged A. Case 1: Uncoupled systems
contribution is zero.15 Equation (13) offers a simplified framework

In this case, the coupling capacitor is set to C
for analysis and simulations, enabling more accessible comparisons c = 0 fF, which

represents an uncoupled system. The time evolution of the flux and
with the phenomenological nonlinear TCMT model than with the

charge in the first circuit is shown in Figs. 2(a) and 2(b). Because
full equations. A detailed comparison between the exact, reduced,

the circuits are not coupled, the flux and charge in the second cir-
and phenomenological models is presented in Sec. IV.

cuit remain zero throughout the entire time, as shown in Figs. 2(c)
and 2(d). All three models (exact, reduced, and TCMT) produced

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION identical results for this case.

This section compares the performance of the exact (7),
reduced (13), and phenomenological TCMT models (6) for cou- B. Case 2: Weakly coupled systems
pled nonlinear LC circuits. Numerical simulations were performed

In this case, the value of the coupling capacitor is C
under varying coupling strengths to evaluate the energy exchange c = 0.22 fF,

which is 1% of the capacitor value C = 22 fF, resulting in the param-
and accuracy of the reduced and phenomenological TCMT formu-

eter value ε = Cc = 0.01. This scenario represents a weakly coupled
lations relative to those of the exact model. We used RK45 as a C

system.
numerical solver with a relative tolerance of 10−6.

The time evolution of the flux and charge variables for both
We considered two identical LC circuits with capacitance

circuits is shown in Figs. 3(a)–3(d). Initially, the input was given in
values C1 = C2 = 22 fF and Josephson-junction values J1 = J2

= the first circuit only, but a small response was observed in the sec-
100 nH. To characterize the different coupling regimes, we

ond circuit owing to the weak coupling introduced by the coupling
defined the parameter ε = Cc . The case ε = 0 corresponds to an

C capacitor C
uncoupled system, whereas c. The reduced model perfectly captures the dynam-

ε = 1 represents Cc = C.
ics of this coupling regime, whereas the phenomenological TCMT

For a consistent and meaningful comparison, the parame-
model exhibits a noticeable phase lead. The amplitude error can be

ter values used in the nonlinear phenomenological TCMT model
observed in the phenomenological TCMT model for the values of Q2

are directly taken from the reduced model; i.e., (1)
γ3,0 = −j (1)

α2, γ2,1 and P2 in Figs. 3(c) and 3(d), likely arise from the absence of certain
= −2j (1) (2)

β1, γ0,3 = −jβ2,
(2) 2)

γ3,0 = −j (
β1, γ1,2 = −2jβ2, and γ0,3 = −jα1. interaction terms in the reduced model.

Although the TCMT parameters are generally chosen approxi-
mately, this approach ensures a smoother agreement in the sim-
ulations. Moreover, if certain terms are absent in the reduced C. Case 3: Moderately coupled systems

model, the corresponding coefficients in the TCMT formulation In this case, the coupling capacitor has a value of Cc = 2.2 fF,
are set to zero; i.e., (1)

γ1,2 = (2)
γ2,1 = 0. This assignment of coefficient which is 10% of the capacitor value C = 22 fF, yielding ε = Cc

C
values is not arbitrary but rather systematically follows from the = 0.1. This scenario corresponds to a moderately coupled system.
reduced model, which is derived directly from first principles using The time evolution of the flux and charge variables for both
the Hamiltonian formulation, thereby confirming that such inter- circuits is shown in Figs. 4(a)–4(d). Initially, all three models
action terms are absent in the underlying physical system. The accurately captured the dynamics; however, a noticeable phase lag
cross-coupling coefficients are identical across all three models, con- developed in the phenomenological TCMT model, particularly in
sistent with our earlier results for coupled linear LC circuits and, plot (c). This discrepancy arises from the absence of self-coupling

Chaos 36, 023119 (2026); doi: 10.1063/5.0302806 36, 023119-6

Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing

 11 March 2026 07:23:53



Chaos ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/cha

FIG. 2. Case 1 (uncoupled systems): Time evolution of fluxes (Q1,Q2) and charges (P1, P2) in two uncoupled nonlinear LC circuits with Josephson junctions. Results are
shown for the exact model (7), the reduced model (13), and the phenomenological TCMT model (6). Parameters: Cc = 0 fF, C1 = C2 = 22 fF, and J1 = J2 = 100 nH.

terms κi+ i+ , κi−i− (i = 1, 2) in the phenomenological TCMT formu- dynamics over the time interval t = 0 to t = 150 s. Although the
lation, which serve as correction terms for the natural frequencies. reduced model initially showed good agreement, small discrepan-
These self-coupling terms are crucial for accurately capturing the cies emerged over time, as shown in the relative error plot of energy
phase evolution in coupled systems. In the weakly coupled regime exchange in Fig. 8(c). This trend was more pronounced in the
(Cc = 0.22 fF), the influence of these terms was minimal, and no subsequent cases.
significant phase error was observed. The reduced model contin-
ued to track the dynamics well in this regime. Amplitude deviations E. Case 5: Strongly coupled systems
become more noticeable in the phenomenological TCMT model for
t > 50 s. Here, the coupling capacitor value is Cc = 11 fF, which is 50%

of the capacitor value C = 22 fF, resulting in ε = Cc = 0.50. This
C

scenario represents a strong coupling regime.
D. Case 4: Intermediate-to-strongly coupled systems The time evolution of the flux and charge variables for both

circuits is shown in Figs. 6(a)–6(d). Initially, the reduced model
In this case, the coupling capacitor has a value of Cc = 5.5 fF,

which is 25% of the capacitor value C = 22 fF, resulting in ε = C captures the dynamics perfectly, but a close inspection reveals that
c

C an amplitude error can be observed after t > 100, particularly in
= 0.25. This scenario represents a slightly stronger coupling than Figs. 6(a) and 6(d). This error continued to increase over long peri-
the previous one. ods. The reduced model did not exhibit any phase lag owing to the

The time evolution of the flux and charge variables for both presence of self-coupling coefficients in both the exact and reduced
circuits is shown in Figs. 5(a)–5(d). Clearly, the phase lag and ampli- models.
tude errors can be observed in the phenomenological TCMT model,
particularly in the charge responses P1 and P2 shown in (b) and
(d), respectively. The contribution of the self-coupling coefficients F. Energy transfer between coupled systems

can be easily observed here, as their absence in the phenomeno- One of the key objectives of using a reduced-order model is to
logical TCMT model leads to a significant phase lag in the fre- accurately capture the energy exchange between the subsystems. The
quency response curve. The reduced model accurately captured the energy transfer for different coupling capacitor values Cc = 2.2 fF,

Chaos 36, 023119 (2026); doi: 10.1063/5.0302806 36, 023119-7

Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing

 11 March 2026 07:23:53



Chaos ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/cha

FIG. 3. Case 2 (weakly coupled systems): Time evolution of fluxes (Q1,Q2) and charges (P1, P2) in two identical nonlinear LC circuits with Josephson junctions. Results are
shown for the exact model (7), the reduced model (13), and the phenomenological TCMT model (6). Parameters: Coupling capacitor Cc = 0.22 fF, C1 = C2 = 22 fF, and
J1 = J2 = 100 nH.

FIG. 4. Case 3 (moderately coupled systems): Time evolution of fluxes (Q1,Q2) and charges (P1, P2) in two moderately coupled nonlinear LC circuits with Josephson
junctions. Results are shown for the exact model (7), the reduced model (13), and the phenomenological TCMT model (6). Parameters: Coupling capacitor Cc = 2.2 fF,
C1 = C2 = 22 fF, and J1 = J2 = 100 nH.

Chaos 36, 023119 (2026); doi: 10.1063/5.0302806 36, 023119-8

Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing

 11 March 2026 07:23:53



Chaos ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/cha

FIG. 5. Case 4 (intermediate-to-strongly coupled systems): Time evolution of fluxes (Q1,Q2) and charges (P1, P2) in two intermediate-to-strongly coupled nonlinear LC
circuits with Josephson junctions. Results are shown for the exact model (7), the reduced model (13), and the phenomenological TCMT model (6). Parameters: Coupling
capacitor Cc = 5.5 fF, C1 = C2 = 22 fF, and J1 = J2 = 100 nH.

FIG. 6. Case 5 (strongly coupled systems): Time evolution of fluxes (Q1,Q2) and charges (P1, P2) in two strongly coupled nonlinear LC circuits with Josephson junctions.
Results are shown for the exact model (7), the reducedmodel (13), and the phenomenological TCMTmodel (6). Parameters: Coupling capacitorCc = 11 fF,C1 = C2 = 22 fF,
and J1 = J2 = 100 nH.

Chaos 36, 023119 (2026); doi: 10.1063/5.0302806 36, 023119-9

Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing

 11 March 2026 07:23:53



Chaos ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/cha

FIG. 7. Energy exchange between two coupled nonlinear identical LC circuits with Josephson junctions for coupling capacitor values: (a) Cc = 2.2 fF, (b) Cc = 5.5 fF, and
(c) Cc = 11 fF, comparing the exact (7), reduced (13), and phenomenological TCMT (6) models. The capacitance values are C1 = C2 = 22 fF, and Josephson-junction
values are J1 = J2 = 100 nH.

5.5 fF, and 11 fF is shown in Figs. 7(a)–7(c). The phenomeno- 1, completing a full exchange cycle, commonly referred to as the
logical TCMT model predicts a smooth and gradual exchange of coupling length. Although we call it coupling length, it has a time
energy between the two circuits. In contrast, both the exact and dimension. We follow this nomenclature to be consistent with the
reduced models revealed additional oscillatory features. These oscil- spatial CMT, where this notion originated. Although an analytical
lations arise from physical effects that the phenomenological model expression for the coupling length is available in the linear case,7 in
neglects: namely, the rapidly oscillating linear terms and the third- this nonlinear case, it is determined numerically, as marked by the
order nonlinear interaction introduced by backward-propagating vertical line h in Figs. 7(a)–7(c).
waves, which are explicitly retained in the reduced model [see A close inspection revealed that the coupling length in the
Sec. 7(c)], where the pink curves labeled “Reduced (no ROT)” reduced model differed from that in the phenomenological TCMT
demonstrate that neglecting the rapidly oscillating terms (ROT) model. For a coupling capacitance of Cc = 2.2 fF, the coupling
suppresses the additional oscillations and restores the simplified length in both the exact and reduced models is larger than that
behavior captured by the phenomenological approach. of the phenomenological TCMT model, whereas for Cc = 5.5 fF,

Initially, all the energy is stored in Circuit 1. As time pro- it is smaller. Furthermore, Fig. 7(c) compares the reduced model
gresses, it transfers entirely to Circuit 2 and then returns to Circuit with and without rapidly oscillating terms. The reduced model

FIG. 8. Relative error in | +
a1 |2 during energy exchange for coupling capacitor values: (a) Cc = 0.22 fF, (b) Cc = 2.2 fF, and (c) Cc = 5.5 fF, comparing the reduced (13) and

phenomenological TCMT (6) models against the exact model (7). The capacitance values are C1 = C2 = 22 fF, and Josephson-junction values are J1 = J2 = 100 nH.

Chaos 36, 023119 (2026); doi: 10.1063/5.0302806 36, 023119-10

Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing

 11 March 2026 07:23:53



Chaos ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/cha

retaining these terms matches the coupling length of the exact with time, and a more detailed error analysis and rigorous long-time
model, whereas the version without them aligns closely with the bounds can be pursued in future studies.
phenomenological TCMT model, indicating that the rapidly oscil- This analysis underscores the importance of systematically
lating terms significantly influence the coupling length, particularly accounting for higher-order and rapidly oscillating terms in non-
in stronger-coupling regimes. linear systems, particularly when modeling energy transfer. The

Figures 8(a)–8(c) present the relative error in the energy trans- methodology developed in this study, starting from an exact Hamil-
fer of |a+

1 |2 for coupling capacitor values Cc = 0.22 fF, 2.2 fF, and tonian and applying targeted reductions, can be broadly applied to
5.5 fF, respectively. The relative error is computed as35 other coupled nonlinear systems in the future. The reduced model

∣ ∣

∣|a+ was validated through numerical simulations; however, its analyt-
1 |2exact − |a+

1 |2 ∣

Relative Error = reduced , (1 ical justification remains an open question. Furthermore, neural
|a+ 4)

1 |2exact + 1 circuits coupled with Josephson junctions exhibit fundamental neu-

where the denominator ensures stability near zero, effectively show- ronal behaviors, such as spiking and bursting. Investigating these

ing the absolute error when |a+
1 |2exact = 0. phenomena using reduced-order models and assessing their validity

For Cc = 0.22 fF, the reduced model maintains a low error offers promising opportunities for future studies.

ranging from 10−9 to 10−4, whereas the phenomenological TCMT The Hamiltonian-based reduction procedure presented here is

error lies between 10−5 and 10−1, highlighting the superior accu- not restricted to LC circuits and can be applied to other coupled

racy of the reduced model compared with the phenomenolog- systems formulated in terms of forward- and backward-propagating

ical TCMT. For Cc = 2.2 fF, the reduced model performs well waves, where the relevance of higher-order terms must be assessed

(error 10−8 to 10−1), whereas the phenomenological TCMT error based on the underlying coupling strength and system nonlinearity.

approaches unity. At a stronger coupling (Cc = 5.5 fF), the reduced
model begins to deviate significantly beyond t = 200, indicating that ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
both the reduced and phenomenological TCMT models become

Shubham Garg acknowledges the support of the University
inadequate over longer timescales.

Grants Commission (India) for the fellowship. The authors are
The exact (7), reduced (13), and phenomenological TCMT (6)

grateful to the anonymous reviewer for providing valuable com-
models presented here describe lossless coupled systems. If small

ments that have improved the scope of the work and helped in
resistors R1 and R2 are introduced in each nonlinear LC circuit

gaining deeper insights into the coupled-mode theory model.
(shown in Fig. 1), the system becomes lossy. In such cases, the natu-
ral frequencies ω1 and ω2 can be modified as ω1 + jδ1 and ω2 + jδ2,
where |δi|  ωi for i = 1, 2. Accordingly, the exact (7), reduced (13), AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
and phenomenological TCMT (6) formulations must be updated to Conflict of Interest
account for these losses.

The authors have no conflicts to disclose.

V. CONCLUSIONS
Author Contributions

This study aids in understanding the traditional nonlinear
coupled-mode theory model, which is a commonly used phe- Shubham Garg: Conceptualization (equal); Data curation (equal);
nomenological model. While the literature acknowledges such a Formal analysis (equal); Funding acquisition (equal); Investigation
nonlinear model, an exact model involving both forward and (equal); Methodology (equal); Resources (lead); Software (lead);
backward-propagating waves, including the exact expressions for Validation (equal); Writing – original draft (equal); Writing –
each coefficient of interaction and the reasons for neglecting the review & editing (equal). Kirankumar R. Hiremath: Conceptu-
opposite-propagating waves, is lacking. This study addressed these alization (equal); Formal analysis (equal); Investigation (equal);
questions and provided a systematic method for developing an Methodology (equal); Project administration (equal); Supervision
improved reduced-order model that captures the essential dynam- (equal); Writing – review & editing (equal).
ics, even for moderate-to-slightly strong coupling regimes.

A coupled nonlinear LC circuit, each containing a Josephson DATA AVAILABILITY
junction, was considered, and an exact model was formulated using
Hamiltonian formulation and canonical transformations. From this, Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were

a reduced model was systematically derived, and a detailed numer- created or analyzed in this study.

ical comparison was performed between the exact, reduced, and
widely used phenomenological-based nonlinear coupled-mode the- APPENDIX A: IMPROVED TCMT EQUATIONS FOR
ory models. Although the phenomenological model successfully COUPLED LINEAR LC CIRCUITS IN FLUX
captured the qualitative features, it exhibited phase and amplitude FORMULATION
errors under moderate-to-strong coupling conditions. In contrast,
the reduced model, which preserved the self-coupling, key nonlin- 1. Linear LC circuit

ear, and backward-wave interaction terms, demonstrated signifi- A linear LC circuit consists of a linear inductor L instead of
cantly improved accuracy across a broad range of coupling regimes. the Josephson junction J in Fig. 9. The Lagrangian of the linear LC
However, the error between the reduced and exact models increases circuit is given as

Chaos 36, 023119 (2026); doi: 10.1063/5.0302806 36, 023119-11

Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing

 11 March 2026 07:23:53



Chaos ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/cha

( ) ( )

8̇2 82 8̇
L (8, 8̇) = C − . (A1) e 1 C1 + Cc −C

wher c
8̇ = and C = . From

2 2L 8̇2 −Cc C2 + Cc

2 Eq. (A7), one can see the following relation:
where C 8̇ 2

and 8 are the “kinetic” and “potential” energies. By
2 2L ( ) ( )

defining the generalized coordinates P = ∂L = C8̇, Q = 8, and 1
∂8̇ 8̇ = 8̇ = C−1 P1 .

using the Legendre transformation, the Hamiltonian is given as 8̇2 P2

P2 Q2 The Hamiltonian is given as
H(Q, P) = + . (A2)

2C 2L H(Q1, Q2, P1, P2) = P18̇1 + P28̇2 − L (81, 82, 8̇1, 8̇2)

Consider the following transformations: P2 2

√ = (C 1 P C
( ) 2 + Cc) + c

(C1 + C ) 2
c + P1P2

1 C P 1 2α 2α α
a± √

= ∓ j (LC) 4 ± j√ Q , where {a+, a−} = 1.
2 C LC Q2 Q2

+ 1 + 2 , (A9)
(A3) 2L1 2L2

The amplitudes a+ and a− are related as
where α = det(C). Again, motivating from Eq. (A3), consider the

(

− π )
a = ∗

exp −j (a+) . (A4) transformations
2 √

( )

± √ 1
( ) C P1,2 1

The Hamiltonian in terms of a± is H(a+, a−) = jω + −
0a a , and “equa- a1,2 = ∓ j L 4 1,2

1,2C1,2 ± j√ Q1,2 , (A10)
2 C

tions of motion” for a single linear LC circuit are as 1,2 L1,2C1,2

where
ȧ± = ±jω0a

±. (A5) ( )

− −jπ ( )∗
a +

1,2= exp a ,2 . (A11)
2 1

2. Coupled linear LC circuit
From the above transformations (A11), the Hamiltonian is as

If the Josephson junctions J1 and J2 in Fig. 1 are replaced by
linear inductors L1 and L2, the system reduces to a coupled linear

(

LC circuit. The corresponding Lagrangian is then given by H a± )

, a± + −+jω + jCcC1ω1 ( )

1 2 = jω −
1a1 a1 2a2 a2 − − 2

a+ a−
4α 1 1

C1 C2 C
L (81, 82, 8̇1, 8̇2) = 8̇2 jC )

1 + 8̇2
2 + c 2

(8̇1 − 8̇2)
2 2 2 − cC2ω2 ( 2

a+
4α 2 −a−

2

82 82 √
− 1 − 2 . (A6) jC √ ( ) ( )

2L − c C1C2
ω

1 2L2 1ω2 a+ a+
2α 1 −a−

1 2 −a−
2 . (A12)

For Hamiltonian, we need to define generalized coordinates
Q1, Q2, P1, P2, where Q1 = 81, Q2 = 82, and From Eq. (A12), the following equations give the dynamics of

the coupled LC circuits:
∂L

P1 = = C18̇1 + Cc(8̇1 − 8̇2),
∂8̇ ∂H

(A7) ȧ+ ∂H
1,2= , ȧ− . (A13)

∂L ∂a− 1,2= −
1,2 ∂a+

1,2
P2 = = C28̇2 − Cc(8̇1 − 8̇2).

∂8̇ The system of equations in a matrix form

The Lagrangian in Eq. (A6) becomes da
= Aa, (A14)

1 82 82 dt
L (81, 82, 8̇1, 8̇2) = 8̇TC8̇ − 1 − 2 , (A8)

2 2L1 2L2 where

( )

 

CcC1ω1 jC C
j ω1 + κ1+2+ − c 1ω1

κ1+2−
 2α 2α 

 

( )

 C jC 

cC2ω2
 κ 

 2+1+ j ω2 + cC2ω2
κ2+1− −



2α 2α
 

A = ( ) , (A15)
 

 jCcC1ω1 C 1ω1 

 κ1−2+ −j ω1 + cC
κ1−2− 

 2α 2α 

 

( )

 jCcC2ω2 CcC2ω


2
κ2−1+ κ2−1− −j ω2 +

2α 2α

Chaos 36, 023119 (2026); doi: 10.1063/5.0302806 36, 023119-12

Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing

 11 March 2026 07:23:53



Chaos ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/cha

± ( )

a = [a+ T scaled by ω that is, |a+|2 clusion of the sec Q
1 , a+

2 , a−
1 , a−

2 ] , and 0; = ω0H(a ). The in
2

√ term ensures that the transformation remains canonical. In Eq. (B2),
Cc C1C= 2 √

κ1+2+ κ1−2+ = κ2+1+ = κ2−1+ = −j ω1ω2, a+ denotes the forward-propagating (counterclockwise) wave, com-
2α

√ (A16) monly referred to as the positive frequency component, whereas a−

Cc C1C2 √ epresents the backward-propagating (clockwise) wave, correspond-
κ1+2− = κ1−2− = κ2+1− = κ2−1− = r

j ω1ω2.
2α ing to the negative frequency component. The transformations in

Eq. (B2), at zeroth order, reduce to those used for a linear LC circuit
for the flux formulation, as in Eq. (A3). The relation between the
forward and backward amplitudes a+ and a− is as

APPENDIX B: DERIVATION OF THE EXACT MODEL
FOR COUPLED NONLINEAR LC CIRCUITS ( π )

a−= exp − + ∗
j (a ) , (B3)

This appendix presents the detailed derivation of the governing 2
equations for two coupled nonlinear LC circuits, each contain-

∗ ∗
ing a Josephson junction. Starting from the system Hamiltonian where (a+) and (a−) denote the conjugates of a+ and a−, respec-
expressed in charge and flux variables, canonical transformations tively. Equation (B3) implies that a+ fully determines a−.
are applied to obtain the evolution equations in terms of forward- By assuming that the backward-propagating wave a− affects a+

and backward-propagating modal amplitudes a±
1 and a±

2 . linearly and vice versa, and using Eq. (B3), we propose the following
reduced-order model for the nonlinear LC circuit:

1. Exact model for a nonlinear LC circuit
j

Consider a nonlinear LC circuit containing a capacitor and a ȧ+=jω0a
+− |a+|2a+, (B4)

8C
Josephson junction connected in parallel, as shown in Fig. 9.

In our earlier work,34 we derived an exact model of a nonlin-
ear LC circuit containing a Josephson junction in terms of forward

j
and backward-propagating waves, capturing third-order nonlinear ȧ−= − jω − −

0a + |a−|2a . (B5)
effects. The “equations of motion” for the exact system are as 8C

+ + 1 ( )

ȧ = jω − 2 − 2
a (a+) (a−) , A detailed bifurcation analysis of such reduced and exact models,

0a +
8C along with a comparison of their dynamics, can be found in our ear-

(B1)
( )

+ 2 2 lier study.34 In Appendix B 2, we apply the same transformation to
ȧ− = −jω − 1

0a + a (a+) − (a−) .
8C the Hamiltonian for coupled nonlinear LC circuits and obtain an

exact model of the system. We use this reduction approach to obtain
The exact model was obtained using the following canonical trans- a reduced model for coupled nonlinear LC circuits.
formation in the Hamiltonian of nonlinear LC circuit:

1 ( )
√ √

( ) ( ) ( )

√ C 4 C P Q I Q
a±(t) = ∓ c

j sec ± 2j sin . 2. Exact model for coupled nonlinear LC circuits
Ic 2 C 2 C 2

(B2) Consider two nonlinear LC circuits coupled through a linear
capacitor Cc, as shown in Fig. 1. The Hamiltonian for the coupled

The transformation in Eq. (B2) is initially motivated by the obser- nonlinear LC circuits can be obtained using the same approach as in
vation that the quantity |a+|2 corresponds to the circuit energy Eqs. (A6)–(A9),

P2

C 1 P2 C
H(Q1, Q2, P1, P2) = (C2 + c) + (C1 + C 2

c) + c
P1P2

2α 2α α
( ) ( )

Q Q
+ 1 2

2IC1 sin2 + 2I 2
C sin , (B6)

2 2 2

∣ ∣

∣C + C −C ∣

where 1 c c
α = ∣ ∣

− = C C2 + Cc(C C
C 1 + 2), Q1, Q2,

∣ ∣

c C2 + C 1
c

P1, P2 are the generalized coordinates with values Q1 = 81 and
Q2 = 82, and the coordinates P1, P2 are the same as in Eq. (A7).
Motivating from Eq. (B2), consider the transformation

√

1 ( )
√

( ) ( ) ( )

4
± √ Ci Ci Pi Q Ic Qi

ircuit: Capacitor C and the Josephson junction J are ai (t) = ∓ i
j sec ± 2j i sin ,

FIG. 9. Nonlinear LC c Ic 2 C 2 Ci 2
connected in parallel. i i

(B7)

Chaos 36, 023119 (2026); doi: 10.1063/5.0302806 36, 023119-13

Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing

 11 March 2026 07:23:53



Chaos ARTICLE pubs.aip.org/aip/cha

where i = 1, 2. The Hamiltonian (B6) in terms of a+
1,2 and a−

1,2 is 12J. Kutz, B. Eggleton, J. Stark, and R. Slusher, “Nonlinear pulse propagation in
long-period fiber gratings: Theory and experiment,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum

( )

( C2 C ( )2
a± ) − 1 Electron. 3, 1232–1245 (1997).

H 1 , a±
2 = jω1a

+
1 a1 − + c 2

(a+) − 2
(a−

α α 1 1 ) 13
32 L. Jiang, W. Jiang, and K. S. Chiang, “Nonlinear mode coupling in graphene-

buried optical waveguides,” APL Photon. 8, 126113 (2023).
( )

1 C C ( )2 14
+ 1 c S. Fan, “12 - Photonic crystal theory: Temporal coupled-mode formalism,” in

jω2a
+
2 a−

2 − + (a+ 2
) − ( − 2

α 2 a2 )
32 α Optical Fiber Telecommunications V A, Optics and Photonics, 5th ed., edited

by I. P. Kaminow, T. Li, and A. E. Willner (Academic Press, Burlington, 2008),
jC C

− c 1ω1 ( j ω
a+ ) C C (

−a− 2 − c 2 2
a+−a−)2 pp. 431–454, ISSN: 15575837.

4α 1 1 4α 2 2 15G. P. Agrawal, Nonlinear Fiber Optics, 5th ed., Optics and Photonics (Academic
√ Press, 2013).

jC C √ (

− c 1C2
ω + ) ( + 16

1ω2 a − )

1 −a − A. G. Nair, S. L. Brunton, and K. Taira, “Networked-oscillator-based modeling
1 a2 −a

2α 2
and control of unsteady wake flows,” Phys. Rev. E 97, 063107 (2018).

C ω √ 17
√ S. A. Emam and A. H. Nayfeh, “Non-linear response of buckled beams to 1:1

− c 1 (

ω + ) ( )

1ω2 C1C2 a
32αI 1 −a− + −) ( −

1 a2 −a +
2 a1 + 2

a1 and 3:1 internal resonances,” Int. J. Non-Linear Mech. 52, 12–25 (2013).
c1 18V. G. Morales and K. Krischer, “The complex Ginzburg–Landau equation: An

C √

− cω2 √ ( introduction,” Contemp. Phys. 53, 79–95 (2012).
ω + ) ( )

1ω2 C1C2 a + (

19
32αI 1 − a−

1 a2 − a− +
2 a2 + a−)2

2 . W. S. Lee, E. Ott, and T. M. Antonsen, Jr., “Phase and amplitude dynamics in
c2

large systems of coupled oscillators: Growth heterogeneity, nonlinear frequency
(B8)

shifts, and cluster states,” Chaos 23, 033116 (2013).
20C. Bick, T. Böhle, and C. Kuehn, “Higher-order network interactions through

From Eq. (B8), the following equations give the dynamics of the phase reduction for oscillators with phase-dependent amplitude,” J. Nonlinear Sci.
coupled nonlinear LC circuits: 34, 77 (2024).

21Q. Zhou, Y. Sun, H. Triki, Y. Zhong, Z. Zeng, and M. Mirzazadeh, “Study on

ȧ+ ∂H propagation properties of one-soliton in a multimode fiber with higher-order
1,2 =

∂a− ,
effects,” Results Phys. 41, 105898 (2022).

1,2
(B9) 22A. A. Hamadeh, D. Slobodianiuk, R. Moukhader, G. Melkov, V. Borynskyi,

M. Mohseni, G. Finocchio, V. Lomakin, R. Verba, G. de Loubens, P. Pirro, and
ȧ− ∂H

1,2 = −
∂a+ ,

O. Klein, “Simultaneous multitone microwave emission by dc-driven spintronic
1,2

nano-element,” Sci. Adv. 9, eadk1430 (2023).
which gives the exact “equations of motion” for the coupled nonlin- 23P. Lalanne, W. Yan, A. Gras, C. Sauvan, J.-P. Hugonin, M. Besbes, G. Demésy,

ear LC circuits as given in Eq. (7) (see Sec. III). M. D. Truong, B. Gralak, F. Zolla, A. Nicolet, F. Binkowski, L. Zschiedrich,
S. Burger, J. Zimmerling, R. Remis, P. Urbach, H. T. Liu, and T. Weiss, “Quasi-
normal mode solvers for resonators with dispersive materials,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A

REFERENCES
36, 686–704 (2019).

1I. Franović, S. Eydam, and D. Eroglu, “Regime switching in coupled nonlinear 24Y. Zhang, Y. Xu, Z. Yao, and J. Ma, “A feasible neuron for estimating the
systems: Sources, prediction, and control—Minireview and perspective on the magnetic field effect,” Nonlinear Dyn. 102, 1849–1867 (2020).
Focus Issue,” Chaos 34, 120401 (2024). 25M. Benzaouia, J. D. Joannopoulos, S. G. Johnson, and A. Karalis, “Quasi-
2H. Haus, Waves and Fields in Optoelectronics (Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood normal mode theory of the scattering matrix, enforcing fundamental constraints
Cliffs, NJ, 1984). for truncated expansions,” Phys. Rev. Res. 3, 033228 (2021).
3T. Christopoulos, O. Tsilipakos, and E. E. Kriezis, “Temporal coupled-mode 26C. Tao, J. Zhu, Y. Zhong, and H. Liu, “Coupling theory of quasinormal modes
theory in nonlinear resonant photonics: From basic principles to contemporary for lossy and dispersive plasmonic nanoresonators,” Phys. Rev. B 102, 045430
systems with 2D materials, dispersion, loss, and gain,” J. Appl. Phys. 136, 011101 (2020).
(2024). 27B. D. Josephson, “Possible new effects in superconductive tunnelling,” Phys.
4P. E. Barclay, K. Srinivasan, and O. Painter, “Nonlinear response of silicon pho- Lett. 1, 251–253 (1962).
tonic crystal microresonators excited via an integrated waveguide and fiber taper,” 28A. A. Golubov, M. Y. Kupriyanov, and E. Il’ichev, “The current-phase relation
Opt. Express 13, 801–820 (2005). in Josephson junctions,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 76, 411–469 (2004).
5H. A. Haus and W. P. Huang, “Coupled mode theory,” Proc. IEEE 79, 1505–1518 29J. Ma and J. Tang, “A review for dynamics in neuron and neuronal network,”
(1991). Nonlinear Dyn. 89, 1569–1578 (2017).
6I. V. Timofeev, P. S. Pankin, S. Y. Vetrov, V. G. Arkhipkin, W. Lee, and V. Y. 30D. Agueev and D. Pelinovsky, “Modeling of wave resonances in low-contrast
Zyryanov, “Chiral optical Tamm states: Temporal coupled-mode theory,” Crystals photonic crystals,” SIAM J. Appl. Math. 65, 1101–1129 (2005).
7, 113 (2017). 31T. T. Koutserimpas and R. Fleury, “Coupled-mode theory for stationary and
7S. Garg and K. R. Hiremath, “Improved reduced order model for study of nonstationary resonant sound propagation,” Wave Motion 89, 221–231 (2019).
coupled phenomena,” J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 57, 415202 (2024). 32A. A. Sukhorukov, A. S. Solntsev, S. S. Kruk, D. N. Neshev, and Y. S. Kivshar,
8L. Manevitch and A. I. Musienko, “Short wavelength dynamics of the system “Nonlinear coupled-mode theory for periodic plasmonic waveguides and meta-
of nonlinear oscillators coupled by stretched weightless beam,” Chaos, Solitons materials with loss and gain,” Opt. Lett. 39, 462–465 (2014).
Fractals 26, 107–116 (2005). 33S. Rasmussen, K. Christensen, S. Pedersen, L. Kristensen, T. Bækkegaard,
9C. Martel, M. Higuera, and J. Carrasco, “Localized dispersive states in nonlinear N. Loft, and N. Zinner, “Superconducting circuit companion—An introduction
coupled mode equations for light propagation in fiber Bragg gratings,” SIAM J. with worked examples,” PRX Quantum 2, 040204 (2021).
Appl. Dyn. Syst. 8, 576–591 (2009). 34S. Garg and K. R. Hiremath, “Bifurcation analysis of classical nonlinear LC cir-
10B. Crosignani, C. H. Papas, and P. D. Porto, “Coupled-mode theory cuits containing Josephson junctions: Comparison of reduced and exact models,”
approach to nonlinear pulse propagation in optical fibers,” Opt. Lett. 6, 61–63 Nonlinear Dyn. 113, 15503–15516 (2025).
(1981). 35M. Gilli, D. Maringer, and E. Schumann, “Numerical analysis in a nutshell,” in
11C. M. de Sterke and J. E. Sipe, “Switching dynamics of finite periodic nonlinear Numerical Methods and Optimization in Finance (Academic Press, 2019), Chap. 2,
media: A numerical study,” Phys. Rev. A 42, 2858–2869 (1990). pp. 17–30.

Chaos 36, 023119 (2026); doi: 10.1063/5.0302806 36, 023119-14

Published under an exclusive license by AIP Publishing

 11 March 2026 07:23:53